creatures who have singular births, it guarantees conception and birth of the offspring. This spell negates the effects of any Block Fertility spell.  ▶   Enhance Unit  Magnitude 3, Duration 6 Hours [Religions: War] For the duration of this spell a troop of up to thirty soldiers gain +1D6 damage. Also they cannot be routed or affected by any mind control magic (such as Befud- dle).  ▶   Excommunicate  Magnitude 5, Permanent, Resist (Persistence) [Religions: All] This spell severs the mystical link an Initiate enjoys with their god, causing the target of the spell to im- mediately and permanently lose all Divine Magic from the caster’s religion. The target will never again be able to learn or use Divine Magic spells from the religion, though they will still be able to use Lore (Religion) for purely academic purposes. This spell must be cast by a Priest and takes one hour to cast. The Initiate need not be present. The spell can only be cast on Initiates or higher and who worship the same god of the caster of the spell.  ▶   Exorcism  Concentration, Magnitude 3 [Religions: All] A Divine Magic caster can draw out a spirit currently possessing a mortal being by using this spell. Whether the possession is dominant or covert is immaterial. This spell forces a possessing spirit into Spirit Com- bat. The caster uses his Religion (Own) as the attacking skill in the opposed contest, as this represents the stre- ngth of their faith. If the caster is successful in defeating the spirit, it is cast out of the victim and flees.   If the caster fails, the spirit remains in the possessed victim.  ▶   Extension  Duration Special, Magnitude 1, Progressive [Religions: All] This spell lengthens the duration of any Divine Magic spell with the Duration trait. Extension, and the spell it is extending, are cast simultaneously by the caster – this is an exception to the normal rule that only one Divine Magic spell may be cast during a single Combat Round. Each point of Magnitude of the Extension spell dou- bles the target spell’s duration.   Thus, a Magnitude 1 Extension increases Breathe Water’s Duration to 30 min- utes, a Magnitude 2 increases it to one hour, Magnitude 3 increases it to two hours, Magnitude 4 increases it to four hours, and so on.  ▶   Fear  Instant, Magnitude 1, Ranged, Resist (Persistence) [Religions: Chaos, Night] This spell causes the target to be gripped with over- whelming fear. Fear has no effect on unconscious targets, targets without an INT Characteristic or targets that are  70   Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 73 ===

currently under the influence of a Fear spell. The effect depends on the result of the Persistence check as follows:  Fumble:   Victim instantly loses half original Hit Point damage (enough to cause a Major Wound) as its heart falters.  Failure:   Victim flees in screaming terror for a number of Combat Rounds equal to 20 minus its POW (mini- mum of one Combat Round). Victim will not engage in combat unless forced to and will use the Run Com- bat Action whenever possible (unless a faster mode of egress is available).  Success:   Victim is shaken and disturbed, suffering a Penalty die (-1P) to all skill tests for a number of Combat Rounds equal to 20 minus its POW (mini- mum of one Combat Round).  Critical:   Victim is unaffected by the spell and cannot be affected by further Fear spells for a number of Com- bat Rounds equal to its POW.  ▶   Find X  Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Ranged [Religions: All] This is actually several spells, though they all operate in a similar fashion, which allow the caster to locate the closest target of the spell within its range.   This effect is stopped by a thick substance such as metal, earth or stone if it is at least one metre thick. It is also blocked by Absorption, though the caster will know the target is somewhere within range (though not its precise location) and that it is being protected by Absorption. Unlike the Folk Magic Detect spells, the Find spells do not require concentration on the part of the caster – they simply function and alert them to the presence of whatever they are meant to locate. The separate Find spells are listed below.  Find Enemy:   Gives the location of one creature who intends to harm the caster.  Find Magic:   Gives the location of the nearest magic item, magical creature, or active spell.  Find (Species):   Each Find Species spell will give the location of the nearest creature of the specified species. Examples of this spell include Find Goblin, Find Dwarf and Find Horse  Find Substance:   Each Find Substance spell will give the location of the nearest substance of the specified type. Examples of this spell include Find Coal, Find Gold and Find Wood. The Gamemaster should provide the rough power of the detected subject (‘weak magic’ or ‘rich gold lode’).  ▶   Illusion  Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Ranged [Religions: Moon, Trickster] This spell creates an illusion based on all five senses. The illusion will seem real and solid unless the person looking at it succeeds in a Perception test. If the viewer succeeds in a Perception test and the Illusion could usu- ally cause damage if believed in, it can no longer cause damage to that character.   As soon as a viewer disbe- lieves the illusion it becomes insubstantial and ghost-like to him. The Size and the strength of the illusion is governed by the Magnitude. A Magnitude 1 Illusion creates ob- jects or creatures up to SIZ 20 and viewers have two Bonus dice (+2B) to their Perception test to disbelieve the illusion.   For every extra Magnitude the caster can choose to either increase the size by 10 or apply a Penalty die (-1P) to the Perception test.   Thus, with 5 Magni- tude a caster could create a creature up to SIZ 30 with a Penalty die (-1P) to notice it. A positive Perception modifier means that the illu- sion is slightly fuzzy and unreal round the edges while a negative modifier means that it is indistinguishable from the real thing.  ▶   Invisibility  Magnitude 4, Concentration, Touch, Personal [Religion: Trickster] For the duration of the spell the recipient is com- pletely invisible to sight.   They can still be heard, felt or smelled, with a Penalty die (-1P) to Perception tests. Also, the spell is automatically dispelled if the caster loses concentration, or the recipient casts a spell or makes an attack.   The recipient also becomes visible immedi- ately after the spell ending, so even if the caster im- mediately casts another Invisibility spell there will be a delay between castings where the recipient is visible.  ▶   Jigsaw  Magnitude 4, Duration 6 Hours, Resist (Persistence) [Religions: Trickster] This spell literally causes the target to fall to pieces upon a failed Persistence roll.   The victim will still be alive, but will not require food or water during the time the spell is in operation.   If the spell is dispelled the victim will die unless they have been painstakingly put together beforehand.  ▶   Lightning Strike  Instant, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Ranged, Resist (Dodge) [Religions: Storm] This spell causes a sizzling bolt of lightning to streak from the hand of the caster toward the target.   If the bolt is not dodged, each point of Magnitude of the spell will cause 1D6 damage. Armour Points are not effective  71 Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 74 ===

against this damage and it counts as both magical and electrical damage.  ▶   Madness  Instant, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Ranged, Resist (Persistence) [Religions: Chaos, Moon] This spell causes the target to lose contact with real- ity and become a gibbering loon. Madness has no effect on unconscious targets, targets without an INT Charac- teristic or targets that are currently under the effect of a Madness spell. The effect depends on the result of the Persistence check as follows:  Fumble:   Victim instantly loses 1D4 INT permanently and lapses into a catatonic state for a number of min- utes equal to 20 minus its POW (minimum of one Combat Round).  Failure:   Victim gibbers and raves uncontrollably for a number of Combat Rounds equal to 20 minus its POW (minimum of one Combat Round).   Victim will per- form random Combat Actions during this period. Roll 1D6: (1) Move to close combat and attack a random target; (2) Run in a random direction; (3) Cast a spell at random target; (4) Use ranged attack against ran- dom target; (5) Shout at random target; (6) Change stance.  Success:   Victim is shaken and disturbed, suffering a Penalty die (-1P) to all skill tests for a number of Combat Rounds equal to 20 minus its POW (mini- mum of one Combat Round).  Critical:   Victim is unaffected by the spell and cannot be affected by further Madness spells for a number of Combat Rounds equal to its POW.  ▶   Mindblast  Instant, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Ranged, Resist (Persistence) [Religions: Moon] This spell applies a penalty to the victim’s INT equal to the Magnitude of the spell. The effect lasts a number of days equal to the caster’s current CHA.  ▶   Mindlink  Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Ranged [Religions: All] This spell allows the transmission of spell knowledge, conscious thoughts and Power Points between partici- pants. Additional points of Magnitude allow multiple sets of people to be linked together, either creating several sep- arate pairs of Mindlinked people, or making the caster the central hub of a small Mindlink network. In the sec- ond case, only the central character is linked directly to other participants. Mindlink must be cast upon all participants at the same time and is limited to consenting participants. Any participant in a Mindlink may use the spell knowledge and Power Points of others they are linked to without consent. Participants in a Mindlink have a special vulnera- bility to INT, POW, CHA and morale-affecting spells. Such a spell cast against any member of a Mindlink will affect all those connected, though all participants are entitled to defend themselves individually. Although participants in a Mindlink share PPs and conscious thought, they remain their own entity. Mind- link does not include hidden thoughts, memories, uncon- scious urges or permanent spell knowledge. A Mindlink participant may cast a spell one of the other participants has, but only if they have the necessary spellcasting skill – Mindlink does not allow sharing of skills. Any participant may sever their connection to the Mindlink as a Combat Action.   If any participant in Mindlink leaves the spell’s range, that participant is con- sidered to have left the Mindlink.  ▶   Miraculous Item  Magnitude 1, Progressive, Duration 1 Hour [Religions: Craft] This spell allows the caster to create items literally from nowhere.   The size of the item depends upon the Magnitude of the spell:  1 - Small items, such as pots, plates, knives, a de- faced detail on a stone fresco, etc.  2 - Medium.   Large containers such as wine am- phorae, target shields, longswords, human sized armour, a missing arm on a broken statue.  3 - Large. Tower shields, broken doors, a missing masonry feature such as a column.  72   Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 75 ===

4 - Huge. Giant armour, ruined houses, shattered towers.  5 - Enormous. The broken parts of a walking cas- tle, the ruined walls of a city. Such items are always of the finest quality and do not break under any circumstance. For the cost of the Mag- nitude in Improvement Points the item can last perma- nently. Otherwise it disappears after one hour.  ▶   Mischief  Magnitude 2, Touch, Resist (Persistence), Duration 15 [Religions: Trickster] Mischief is a minor trickster’s spell which afflicts its target with a small irritating curse. Roll 1D20 on the following list for a result, which stays in place for the duration of the spell.  1:   Clothes disappear.  2:   Hair goes green.  3:   Hair drops out.  4:   Grows beard regardless of sex.  5:   The target’s weapon becomes a bunch of flowers.  6:   Armour becomes the festive dress of the opposite sex.  7:   Feet become duck feet.  8:   Head becomes that of a domestic animal (cow, pig, sheep, etc.)  9:   Victim smells of excrement (Penalty die (-1P) to De- ception or Influence rolls).  10:   Wobbles uncontrollably (Penalty die (-1P) to at- tacks, Athletics and any other roll involving dexter- ity).  11:   The victim can only speak gibberish.  12:   The victim says the most inappropriate things at the most socially awkward times.   Penalty die (-1P) to any Influence rolls.  13:   The victim falls asleep for 1D6 rounds on failed Per- sistence roll whenever they enter combat.  14:   Makes loud flatulent noises whenever they move; Penalty die (-1P) to any Deception rolls.  15:   The victim is compelled to tell the truth at all times.  16:   No one ever takes the character seriously.   Always has to make an Influence roll with a Penalty die (-1P) to convince others.  17:   Turns into a dog.  18:   Arms turn to rubber, unable to hold anything.  19:   The victim becomes short, half SIZ.  20:   Roll twice.  ▶   Puppet  Magnitude 3, Resist (Persistence), Concentration, Duration 6 Hours [Religions: Trickster] The caster uses this spell to enchant a puppet which is the focus of the spell and the stand-in for the victim. The victim can use Persistence to resist the spell, and if they fail their actions are controlled via the puppet by the Caster, for the duration of the spell. The victim is aware of not being in control of their body, but is powerless to stop it. The exception to this rule is when the victim’s life, or that of a friend is in danger because of the Puppeteer’s commands. Then the victim is allowed another Persistence roll, and, if successful, breaks free of the spell’s control.  ▶   Purity (Religion/Creed)  Magnitude 2, Touch [Religions: Trickster] This spell removes a perceived sin according to a par- ticular religion. If the caster is out of favour because of said sin, all is forgotten and forgiven.  ▶   Quicksand  Magnitude 2, Area, Resist (Persistence), Duration 15 [Religions: Earth] This spell creates a patch of quicksand 10m square. The earth in the area becomes boggy and saturated with water. On a failed Persistence roll, any character stand- ing on the patch will sink down into the earth, at a rate of 1 metre a round. The quicksand holds the victim firmly and only by dispelling the magic can they be rescued. Once the duration of the spell is over the victim, if not on the surface, is buried under the now solid earth (see Suffocation rules on page 80).  ▶   Radiant Appearance  Magnitude 2, Duration 1 Day [Religions: Sun] The recipient of this spell glows with light and power. They gain two Bonus dice (+2B) to any Influence rolls for the duration of the spell. Also any light-hating crea- tures suffer a Penalty die (-1P) when attacking the re- cipient.  ▶   Repair and Replace  Magnitude 1, Progressive, Instant [Religions: Craft] This spell repairs broken crafted items.   It also re- places missing parts of an item.   The size of the item depends on the Magnitude of the spell:  1 - Small items, such as pots, plates, knives, a de- faced detail on a stone fresco, etc.  73 Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 76 ===

2 - Medium.   Large containers such as wine am- phorae, target shields, longswords, human sized armour, a missing arm on a broken statue.  3 - Large. Tower shields, broken doors, a missing masonry feature such as a column.  4 - Huge. Giant armour, ruined houses, shattered towers.  5 - Enormous. The broken parts of a walking cas- tle, the ruined walls of a city.  ▶   Reflection  Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Ranged [Religions: Trickster] This spell reflects incoming spells aimed at the tar- get or his equipment, redirecting the spell back at the original caster.   Once cast on a subject, Reflection will attempt to reflect any spells cast at the target.   It will not have any effect on spells that are already affecting a character. The effects of Reflection depend on the rela- tive Magnitude of both itself and the incoming spell. If the Reflection’s Magnitude is equal or greater to the in- coming spell then it is reflected and Reflection remains; if not Reflection is eliminated and the incoming spell takes effect. Reflection is incompatible with Absorption, Shield and Spirit Block.  ▶   Resurrect  Concentration Special, Instant, Magnitude 5, Touch [Religions: Death, Fertility, Sun] The body of the deceased must be present and must be whole. If the target died due to disease or poison, the ailment must be eliminated or the Resurrect spell will fail. This spell summons the deceased spirit to return its former body. Resurrect takes a number of minutes equal to the target’s totalled Characteristics to take effect, during which time the caster must maintain concentra- tion on the spell.   If interrupted the spell fails.   If the spell is completed without interruption the dead charac- ter returns to life with one hit point. Resurrect must be cast within a number of days equal to the POW of the deceased. Casting the spell after this point results in the magic automatically failing.  ▶   Rout  Magnitude 3 [Religions: War] When aimed at a body of warriors, no more than one hundred persons, they make a Persistence roll or imme- diately lose all cohesion as a unit and rout.   Routing units move at double movement, away from the caster to ideally a place of safety. They will not defend them- selves, but will attack any enemy units that get in their way, with the aim of getting through them to their place of safety.  ▶   See Past  Magnitude 2, Area, Concentration [Religions: Knowledge] When cast on a 10m area, the caster can see that area as it was in any past point of time he wishes. They still need to make successful Perception rolls to notice details, such as important clues, and they cannot interact with the scene they see in any way, shape or form.  ▶   Shield  Duration 15, Magnitude 2, Progressive [Religions: War] This spell protects the caster from physical and mag- ical attacks.   Each two points of Magnitude gives the caster two Armour Points as well as a Bonus die (+1B) to any tests the caster may make to resist malign magical effects.   These effects are cumulative with other spells, as well as any physical armour the caster is wearing. Shield is incompatible with Absorption, Reflection and Spirit Block.  ▶   Soul Sight  Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Touch [Religions: All] This spell allows the recipient to see the POW aura of anyone he looks at, enabling them to discern that creature’s current Power Points, as well as the nature of any active spells or enchanted items the creature is carrying. It also allows the recipient to see into the Spirit World.  ▶   Stink Bomb  Magnitude 1, Resist (Resilience) [Religions: All] Upon being targeted by this spell, the victim be- comes covered in a tightly fitting cloak of noxious smelling gas for 1D6 rounds. Each round the victim must make a Resilience test or take 1D4 damage. If the resistance test result is fumbled, the character is unconscious for the remaining duration of the spell from being knocked out by the smell.   All Influence tests and other social interactions are at a Penalty die (-1P) for the duration of the spell.  ▶   Spirit Block  Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Touch [Religions: All]  74   Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 77 ===

The recipient of Spirit Block may only be touched by Spirits with a POW high enough to break through the spell’s Magnitude; 1 - POW 10+, 2 - POW 17+, 3 - POW 26+, 4 - POW 37+, 5 - POW 50+, 6 - POW 65+, 7 - 82+, 8 - 101+. A spirit unable to touch a Spirit Blocked character will not be able to personally attack or harm the recipi- ent, including through ranged attacks (such as a thrown spectral javelin). A spell cast by a spirit at the recipient is blocked unless its Magnitude exceeds Spirit Block’s Magnitude. Spirit Block is incompatible with Absorption, Reflec- tion and Shield.  ▶   Sun Disc  Magnitude 1, Ranged, Resist (Dodge) [Religions: All] Upon casting this spell, the Caster projects a disc of blinding light from their hand.   Targets in the path of the disc are blinded for 1D4 hours, unless they pass their Dodge skill test. Its warming effect melts ice upon contact, even magical ice, if under three magnitude in power, and gives anyone it touches two Bonus dice (+2B) to resistance versus cold.  ▶   Sunspear  Instant, Magnitude 4, Ranged, Resist (Dodge) [Religions: Sun] This spell will only function in direct sunlight. When cast, a shaft of light two metres wide streaks from the sky to blast a single target, who must be visible to the caster. If the target does not dive out of the way, the blazing light will burn it for 4D6 damage.   Armour points are not effective against this damage and it counts as both magical and fire damage.  ▶   Summon Holy Steed  Magnitude 3, Duration 1 Day [Religions: Various] This spell summons a Holy Steed (see page 100) from the Other World which is associated with the Deity that the Summoner worships. The Steed will obey the orders of the Summoner until the duration of the spell is up at which point the Steed will return to the Other World from whence it came. If the caster spends 3 Improvement Points the Steed summoned will remain in their service on a permanent basis, unless killed.  ▶   Summon Holy Warrior  Magnitude 3, Duration 1 Day [Religions: Various] This spell summons a Holy Warrior (see page 101) from the Other World which is associated with the De- ity that the Summoner worships. The Warrior will obey  the orders of the Summoner until the duration of the spell is up at which point the Warrior will return to the Other World from whence it came. If the caster spends 3 Improvement Points the Warrior summoned will remain in their service on a permanent basis, unless killed. War- riors are usually summoned to act as bodyguards, trea- sure guards and assassins. Special powers for Warriors are available at the cost of increasing the spell’s Magnitude by 1. Typically these are random (roll 1D12):  1 - Additional mode of attack.  2 - Extra set of arms, additional attack.  3 - Extra natural weapon, eg. Horns D10 damage.  4 - Breathes fire or ice or lighting (appropriate to elemental alliances of Deity) for D10 damage once per combat round.  5 - Wings, therefore flies at 18 Move.  6 - Hideous appearance that strikes fear into en- emies (two Bonus dice (+2B) to Influence roll when Intimidating) or Beautiful appearance which charms all that behold them (two Bonus dice (+2B) to In- fluence rolls).  7 - Mighty Divine weapons that does D20 damage.  8 - Shapechanger.  9 - Heavily armoured (9 AP instead of normal 6AP).  10 - Can become insubstantial and walk through solid walls.   While in this state can not interact with the real world.  11 - Can become Invisible at will.  75 Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 78 ===

12 - Faster, +18 Move, than normal. Examples: The Horned Horror of Yiko has Ranged Combat with a bow as an additional mode of attack, horns on its head which can be used as a weapon, and has a pair of wings, which means it requires a 6 Magnitude spell to summon it. The Treasure Demon of Surlis-Sang, is a shapechanger that actually hides as the Treasure chest containing the treasure it is protecting, and so needs a 4 point spell to summon.  ▶   Sureshot  Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Ranged [Religions: Hunter] When cast on a missile weapon (such as a knife, ar- row, javelin or rock), firing it triggers the spell. Unless the wielder of the weapon rolls an automatic failure or a fumble, the missile hits successfully (though it may be dodged or parried). So long as the target is within the maximum range of the weapon, the missile will strike home, regardless of concealment or any other factors. Attempts to parry or dodge the missile suffer a Penalty die (-1P). Combining Sureshot with Fire Missile, Multi Missile or Speedart does not work, since Sureshot will always take precedence in such cases.  ▶   Touch of Death  Magnitude 4, Touch, Instant, Resist (Persistence) [Religions: Death] The caster must touch their victim and on a failed Persistence test the victim falls dead.   This incredibly powerful spell is available to only members of religions whose Deity wield the power of Death itself. It is usually used to readdress the balance where a person who by all rights should be dead is still alive.  ▶   Treasury  Magnitude 4, Duration 1 Day [Religions: Merchant] This spell creates a secure room, for one day, to store valuables.   All the entrances are locked and only the caster can come in and out without setting off a magical alarm that they can hear, no matter how far away from the room they are.  ▶   True (Weapon)  Magnitude 3, Duration 15, Ranged [Religions: War] When cast on the specified type of weapon, this spell doubles that weapon’s normal damage dice. Other mod- ifiers, such as Damage Modifier, are not affected.   The wielder of the weapon should roll the weapon’s damage twice and total the result.  ▶   Ward Camp  Magnitude 2, Duration 8 Hours, Area [Religions: Merchant] This spell protects a camp with an area of 50 meters squared. Anyone crossing the invisible boundary of the spell takes 1D10 damage and sets off a magical alarm that immediately awakens everyone within the camp. The Ward stays in place, even after it has been crossed, for the full duration of the spell.  ▶   War Effigy  Magnitude 4, Resist (Persistence) [Religions: Trickster] This spell enchants a small wax representation of the intended victim. Spells can be cast at the effigy and af- fect the victim, despite the distance between the effigy and the victim. The caster need not have seen/met the victim, since it is the power of their god that is providing the link. Once a day, the victim can be caused physical harm by driving pins into the effigy, at 1D4 damage per pin. The caster can attempt to kill the victim outright by breaking off the head of the effigy. In this case, the victim gets a Persistence roll to avoid death. On a failed Persistence test, the victim dies. On a successful Persis- tence roll, the effigy no longer has any power over the victim.  ▶   Whirlwind  Magnitude 1, Progressive, Duration 15 Minutes [Religions: Storm] Each point of Magnitude of this spell whips up a whirlwind that is 10 metres tall and is capable of carry- ing 20 SIZ in its whirling vortex. Each round the Whirl- wind moves ten metres per point, in a random direction (use a D8 to determine direction, with 1 being North and 5 being South, progressing clockwise round the di- rections). If a character is hit by the Whirlwind, make a Dodge roll to avoid being caught up in it. Characters who are caught are whipped off their feet, D6 metres into the vortex. Each round roll a D6:  1-2: Carried up D10 metres (if already at the top, blown out the whirlwind the additional height be- fore falling to earth (taking damage).  3-4: Stay at the height they are.  5-6: Fall D6 down in the vortex. If this takes them to the ground they take falling damage.  76   Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 79 ===

PartIII Game Master

=== PAGE 80 ===

CHAPTER 10  Adventuring  10.1 Spot Rules  This selection of rules is designed to deal with individual situations that may crop up throughout the game.  10.1.1   ⋆   Travel  The rates given below are based on average movement rates.   If you need to precisely determine which of two groups reached a destination first, use an Opposed Ath- letics (for walking) or Riding test.  Type   Rate/day   Notes  Hiking   50km   Ten hours of steady walk- ing on road or path with no wagons or animals.   Need to make Fatigue Test at the end of the Hike to avoid be- coming Fatigued. Marching   30km   Marching   in   organised groups for ten hours, ready to fight at the end of the day. No need for a Fatigue test   at   the   end   of   the march. Riding Slow   30km   Moving at a walk accom- panied by pack animals and wagons. Riding   50km   Casual riding. Riding Fast   90km   Riding fast with no wagons. Both mount and rider need to make a Fatigue test at the end of the day.  Table 10.1: Daily Travel Rates The above rates should also be modified by the type of terrain being crossed.  Terrain   Movement Adjustment  Road/Path   100% of normal rate Light brush   80% of normal rate Medium brush   70% of normal rate Light woods   70% of normal rate Rolling Hills   70% of normal rate Heavy woodland   50% of normal rate  Example   Radius  Candle or embers   1m Torch or lantern   3m Campfire   5m Bonfire   10m  Table 10.2: Illuminating Items  10.1.2   ⋆   Illumination & Darkness  Table 10.2 and Table 10.3 give examples light sources and how different levels of illumination and darkness may affect the characters.  ▶   Night Vision  This allows the character to see at night as well as during the day.   Normally possessed by subterranean or dark- ness aligned creatures.  ▶   Night Sight  This ability allows the character to treat partial darkness as illuminated and darkness as only partial darkness. This is normally possessed by nocturnal creatures.  ▶   Blind Sight  The ability of some animals to fight as if sighted although they are not.   For example, using ground vibrations, echolocation, acute hearing or scent.   The exact reason would typically be described in parenthesis, e.g.   Blind Sight (Echolocation).  10.1.3   ⋆   Fatigue  Combat, sprinting, climbing, swimming against a strong current, are all examples of when a character can become fatigued and tired. If the Gamemaster thinks that a character has been engaged in an activity that may have drained him of physical energy, then they may call for a Resilience roll. If the character fails the roll they suffer the effects of Fatigue.  78   Chapter 10.   Adventuring

=== PAGE 81 ===

Environtment   Example   Effects  Brightly Illuminated   Blazing summer day   None. Illuminated   Heavy candlelit room, overcast day, within ra- dius of illuminating item None. Partial Darkness   Cavern mouth, misty day, within 3 x radius of illuminating item (see below). -1P to vision-based Perception tests and com- bat attacks. Darkness   Large cavern illuminated only by embers, foggy day, within 5 x radius of illuminating item. -2P to vision-based Perception tests and com- bat attacks. Movement rate halved. Pitch Black   Sealed room with stone walls,   cavern many miles   underground,   supernatural   darkness, mountaintop whiteout. Perception tests reliant on vision become near impossible, as are ranged attacks. Close combat attacks suffer three Penalty dice (-3P). Move- ment rate a quarter of normal.  Table 10.3: Illumination & Darkness  Example  Rurik has just been in a long, ten round, combat against a group of bandits. Although he has emerged victorious, the Gamemaster rules that Rurik has to roll a successful Resilience test or become Fatigued.  This test is usually made after the activity has been completed, unless the activity is long and drawn out and there is a real danger that Fatigue will stop the task being completed successfully.   For example, on a long hard march the characters are pressing on ahead so that they can reach a fort before an enemy army arrives there. In this case there is a real danger that they will arrive not only too late but tired and worn down.  ▶   The Effects of Fatigue  If a character fails the Resilience test then they become fatigued. All skill tests suffer a Penalty die. Also move- ment rate drops by a quarter.   The character also be- comes sluggish, DEX and INT are each reduced by three points for the purposes of determining Combat Order. If the fatigued character insists on engaging in heavy activity, such as combat, heavy labour or running, then another Resilience roll is made with a Penalty die (-1P). If the character fails this second skill test they become heavily fatigued and all the above penalties are doubled (two Penalty dice (-2P)). If a character fumbles any of their Resilience rolls, then they immediately fall unconscious for 3D6 minutes and upon waking are still fatigued.  ▶   Recovering from Fatigue  A character who completely rests for 20-CON hours will remove the effects of any Fatigue. Certain Powers might also help remove the effects of Fatigue.  10.1.4   ⋆   Exposure, Starvation and Thirst  ▶   Exposure  A character can normally survive for a number of hours equal to his CON before suffering from exposure.  ▶   Starvation  A character can survive for a number of days equal to his CON before becoming starved, though after three days they will begin to suffer a Penalty die (-1P) to Fatigue tests.  ▶   Thirst  A character can survive for a number of hours equal to his CON x 2 before becoming chronically thirsty, though particularly arid environments may reduce this to CON x 1 or even CON x 1/2.  ▶   Effects and Remedy  Whenever a character is suffering from exposure, starva- tion or thirst, a Fatigue test is required with a Penalty die (-1P). In addition, the character will automatically  79 Chapter 10.   Adventuring

=== PAGE 82 ===

suffer one 1D6 of damage every day, for every condi- tion he is experiencing.   Natural healing will not heal this damage – only sufficient shelter, food or water can remedy the problem and allow natural healing to take place.  10.1.5   ⋆   Healing  Healing can be performed in one of two ways – using the First Aid skill or through natural healing, resting while the injuries heal themselves.  10.1.6   ⋆   Natural Healing  A character’s Minor injuries regain CON/4 hit point per 24 hours, as long as the character does not engage in anything more than light activity. Natural healing will not improve Major Wounds. A Major Wound requires treatment with a successful Heal- ing test. Once this is done Major Wounds heal at a rate of one hit point per day, as long as the character does not engage in anything more than light activity, and the character succeeds a daily Resilience test.  10.1.7   ⋆   Encumbrance  Every piece of equipment in the Equipment chapter has an Encumbrance (ENC) score, apart from those items that are too small or light. Characters can usually ignore the effects on Encumbrance that these light items have until they start to carry a lot of them – assume that an average of 20 such items will equal 1 ENC, on the basis that the character has a suitable means of carrying them, such as a sack or backpack. A character can carry equipment whose total ENC is less than or equal to his STR+SIZ without penalty. Encumbrance is a measure of not only weight but also bulk of the item, reflecting the awkwardness of handling the item. Roughly 1 ENC is equal to 1/4 of a SIZ point.  ▶   Overloading  A character carrying total ENC greater than his STR+SIZ is Overloaded.  Overloaded characters suffer a Penalty die (-1P) to all tests that require physical actions, including Weapon skill tests and most tests that have DEX or STR as a Characteristic.  Overloaded characters have their Movement halved. They also suffer a -1P to all Fatigue tests. A character cannot carry more than twice his STR+SIZ in ENC.  10.1.8   ⋆   Falling  A character that takes damage from a fall ends up prone. Armour points do not reduce falling damage. A charac- ter takes 1D6 damage per full 3m fallen. As long as the character was not surprised, they may attempt an Athletics test to mitigate falling damage. A  Substance Inhaled   Damage Taken  Water   2D6 Vacuum   2D6 Thick Smoke   1D6 Poison Gas   Character is exposed to the poison. If the gas is also a thick smoke, then 1D6 damage is incurred in addition to the poison’s effect.  Table 10.4: Suffocating Substance  Damage Source   Example   Damage/CR  Flame   Candle   1 point Large Flame   Torch   1D4 points Small Fire   Camp fire   1D6 points Large Fire   Scolding   steam, large   bonfires, burning rooms 2D6 points Inferno   Lava,   inside   a blast furnace 3D6 points  Table 10.5: Fire and Heat successful test allows the character to treat the fall as if it were two metres shorter than it actually is. In addition, as long as this test is a success and the character is not reduced to 0 hit points due to the fall, the character lands safely and is not prone. If the roll is a critical then miraculously no damage is taken. If the roll is a fumble then the maximum possible damage is taken. Characters falling onto soft surfaces may have the distance they fall effectively halved for the purposes of damage.  10.1.9   ⋆   Suffocation  While underwater or moving through a poison gas cloud a character can hold his breath for a number of Combat Rounds equal to his CON. Once a character has surpassed the time for which he can hold his breath, he must make a Resilience test every round with a cumulative Penalty die (-1P). If he fails, he automatically starts inhaling the suffocating substance. Armour points do not reduce suffocation damage. The damage will only cease once the character can draw breathable air once more. Even then, the character will require a Resilience test to be able to do anything other than wretch or gasp for breath for 1D4 Combat Rounds.  10.1.10   ⋆   Burning  The amount of damage per Combat Round suffered from fire or heat will depend on its intensity, as shown on the Fire and Heat Table.   Metal armour, such as Plate or Chain mail, does not subtract from the rolled damage.  80   Chapter 10.   Adventuring

=== PAGE 83 ===

10.1.11   ⋆   Poison  Plants and creatures have developed poisons as a method of protecting themselves against predators.   They are also used by assassins and wrong doers of all kinds to murder their victims. Every type of poison has the fol- lowing information detailed:  Name:   The poison’s name.   Also, if the poison is not natural, it will be mentioned here.  Type:   Lists whether the poison is ingested, used on a weapon, or inhaled.  Delay:   The time between the poison’s introduction to a character, to the time its effect takes hold.  Potency:   This is a number between 10 and 100 that measures the strength of a poison. Some supernatural poisons, like Basilisk Venom, have even higher Poten- cies.   A character must make an opposed Resilience test versus the poison’s Potency test in order to avoid or mitigate the damage of the poison.  Effect:   Usually hit point damage, though this is not universal.   Some poisons cause a character to sleep for a period of time. More exotic poisons may cause hallucinogenic effects, paralysis or a combination of effects. These take place after the delay noted above.  Duration:   How long the poison, if effective, will affect the victim.   The effects of the poison cannot be re- moved or healed until the poison itself has been neu- tralised or has dissipated in the victim’s system. Hit point damage caused by poison will recover through natural healing. The character’s Resilience and the Poison’s potency are rolled against each other similar to opposed skill checks.  ▶   Example: Gorgon Serpent Venom  Type: Ingested or smeared Delay: 1D3 Combat Rounds Potency: 34 Effect: 1D3 hit point damage and -3 penalty to CON Duration: 6D10 minutes Other poisons: Viper Venom, Belladonna, Mushrooms, Scorpion Sting, Pokeweed or Holly Berries, etc.  10.1.12   ⋆   Disease  Disease is a source of threat in fantasy worlds, either from diseases that ravage the land from time to time or even supernatural diseases.   Every type of disease has the following information detailed:  Name:   The disease’s name. Also, if the disease is not natural, it will be mentioned here.  Type:   Lists whether the disease is spread through con- tamination, touch or is airborne.  Object   Armour Points   Hit Points  Boulder   4   40 Castle gate   4   120 Castle wall (2m)   5   250 Hut wall (2m)   2   15 Iron door   4   75 Wooden chair   2   6 Wooden door   2   25  Table 10.6: Inanimate Objects  Delay:   The time between the diseases introduction to a character, to the time its effect takes hold. It is also the time following disease contraction that a victim will be forced to make follow-up opposed disease tests.  Potency:   This is a number between 10 and 100 that measures the strength of a disease. Some supernatu- ral diseases, like the shining plague, have even higher Potencies.   A character must make an opposed Re- silience test versus the disease’s Potency test in order to avoid or mitigate the damage of the disease.  Effect:   Usually hit point damage, though this is not universal. Many diseases will apply a penalty to Char- acteristics or skills.   More exotic diseases may cause hallucinogenic effects, paralysis or a combination of effects. These take place after the delay noted above. The effects of the disease cannot be removed or healed until the disease itself has been neutralised or has dissi- pated in the victim’s system. Hit point damage caused by disease will recover through natural healing.  ▶   Example: The Shakes  Type: Touch Delay: 1-2 days Potency: 50 Effect: This flu-like disease renders its victims in a cold and constantly shaking state, during which DEX is halved. Also for each day that the victim suffers from the Shakes they take 1D6 hit points of damage. Other diseases: Typhoid, Cholera, Leprosy, Rabies, Malaria, Tuperculosis, Trachoma, etc.  10.1.13   ⋆   Inanimate Objects  All inanimate objects have armour points and hit points. Except in the most unusual of circumstances, attacks on inanimate objects will automatically hit – characters simply need to work out how much damage they deal. The object’s armour points will be deducted from any damage dealt as normal, with the remainder being applied to its hit points.   Once an object’s hit points have been reduced to zero, it is smashed and useless. Note that weapons will get damaged, even break, when repeatedly hitting hard inanimate objects.  81 Chapter 10.   Adventuring

=== PAGE 84 ===

CHAPTER 11  Gamemaster Tools  Gamemasters typically need to know more rules than the players. They need to handle situations that go be- yond a single character, like doing mass battles or travel- ling by ships, optional creature plunder, etc. This chap- ter consolidates such rules for the benefit of Gamemas- ters.  11.1 Plunder Rating  Although Fantasy Crux is not a game of ‘Killing Things and Taking their Stuff’, it is sometimes useful and ex- pected that creatures that the Player Characters meet upon their adventures will have treasure, both mundane and magical. Normally the needs of the story can dictate what treasure and supernatural items a creature possesses, but if a quick random roll is necessary the following guidelines can be consulted. Each creature has a Plunder Rating which is a rat- ing of how much treasure the creature is likely to be carrying.   For creatures that form groups, increase the Plunder Rating by at least one, for groups of up to 20 creatures, by two for larger groups of up to a hundred creatures, and by 3 for groups of over a hundred. In this case the Plunder will be held in a defended and guarded treasure room which the leader of the creatures will have access to. The following table has a list of potential treasure for creatures depending on their Plunder Rating.   If appli- cable (e.g.   campaign has supernatural Disciplines, like magic) also roll for the supernatural items.  11.2 Ships and Sailing  11.2.1   ⋆   Construction  There are, broadly speaking, three types of sailing ship: sloops (small, fast, but comparatively fragile one-masted vessels), brigs (fast and manoeuvrable two-masted ves- sels), and ships (larger vessels with at least three masts, whether warships or cargo vessels). Weapons are handled abstractly; ship-mounted weap- ons are not accurate, and large numbers of shots are fired in order to have a chance to hit an enemy ship. Thus a ship’s weapons are rated abstractly as a single percent- age chance to hit an enemy vessel in combat; almost certainly many weapons are fired for each “hit roll”. A hit generally does D8 damage, subtracted from the other ship’s structure points.  Plunder Rating   Treasure Found  0   Not a hoarder. No treasure whatso- ever. 1   Chance hoarder.   A couple of cop- pers, loose change (1D6 CPs). Very remote (05%) chance of a supernat- ural item, which is either used by ac- cident (my lucky talisman) or which the creature is completely oblivious to. 2   Hoards   enough   for   a   rainy   day. About 5D20 in SPs, 1D10 GPs.   If the creature has supernatural abili- ties, there is a POW % chance of 1D4 Minor supernatural items ap- propriate to the type. 3   Hoards for a better future. Collects treasure for its worth and appreci- ates its value. 5D100 in SPs, 3D20 in GPs.   If the creature has super- natural abilities, there is a POW X 2% chance of 1D4 appropriate Mi- nor supernatural items. 4   Significant hoard. Hoards for hoard- ing’s   sake.   10D100   SPs,   1D100 GPs.   POW   X   3%   of   1D6   Mi- nor supernatural items and POW % chance of 1D4 Major supernatural items. 5   Treasure trove. The wealth of a mi- nor Lord. Examples: Grave goods of a dead noble worth about 1D6 thou- sand Silver Pieces, with 1D6 Minor supernatural Items and POW X 3% chance of 1D6 Major supernatural Items. 6   Wealth of Kings.   eg.   Dragon’s Hoard, a hoard almost beyond com- prehension 1D4 Million Silver pieces, 2D10 Minor,   1D8 Major and one unique supernatural item.  Table 11.1: Plunder  82   Chapter 11.   Gamemaster Tools

=== PAGE 85 ===

Every 10% in weapons reduces cargo capacity by 2 tons, and means two extra crew are needed. The weap- ons level cannot be increased above 100%. Even beyond weapons carried, not all ships are iden- tical; any ship will have one of the following special fea- tures.   It might have more than one such feature; in this case, add +50% of the original cost to the total cost per feature added.  Armoured:   AP 2 against any attacks.  Fast:   Add +1 knot to speed.  Heavy Weapons:   Hits from weapons do D12 rather than D8 damage.  High Capacity:   Increase the cargo size by +40%.  Manoeuvrable:   Add +20% to manoeuvrability.  Marines:   The ship can carry (and provide board and lodging for) a number of marines equal to the size of its crew.  Ram:   The ship can ram other vessels in combat without suffering damage.  Reduced Crew:   The crew size needed to run the ship (as indicated table 11.2) is halved.  11.2.2   ⋆   Sailing Tests  Most potential manoeuvres a vessel can make are gov- erned by the captain’s Sailing skill, modified by the ma- noeuvrability of the vessel.   A further modifier is the average Sailing skill level of the crew:  25% or less (no idea)   Penalty die (-1P) 26%-50% (competent)   - 51%-75% (veteran)   Bonus die (+1B) 76% or more (expert)   two Bonus dice (+2B)  11.2.3   ⋆   Travel  In normal sailing conditions, a sailing vessel can move 20 miles per day per knot of speed.   Speeds given are averages.   Very   favourable   conditions – for example a   good   strong wind in the desired direction of travel (possibly magically arranged) – can double these speeds. As can a rowing crew who critical their Rowing skill test. On the other hand, if a ship is becalmed, with no wind at all, it cannot move. Every day out of sight of land there is a 5% chance of a storm. Storms do 2D6 structure points of damage to a ship; a ship reduced to zero structure points be- gins to sink (and will sink almost instantly if its struc- ture points are reduced to the negative of the origi- nal amount). Further, sailors on deck must make Dodge  tests to stay on board; a sailor swept overboard and not immediately rescued must make an Athletics test to sur- vive. Fortunately, the captain can make a Sailing test (mod- ified by manoeuvrability) to halve damage from a storm. Better yet, it is possible to plot a course to avoid an in- coming storm if it is detected in time (perhaps using magic or skills such as Natural Lore).  11.2.4   ⋆   Naval Combat  We consider two ranges of distance between ships.  ▶   Contact  The vessels can see each other. If both vessels wish to close to combat range, or leave contact, this action is of course automatic, and takes about an hour. If the vessels want different things, roll opposed Sail- ing tests, as above.  ▶   Combat Range  Combat between ships is similar to normal combat. Ini- tiative is decided for each ship, rather than between in- dividuals, by saying that the vessel with the better speed goes first. A single test is made to fire a ship’s weapons; no defence roll is made against these attacks. If desired, a character can be appointed weapons officer; he oversees the firing of a ship’s weapons.   That character should make a Ranged Combat skill test; if the test succeeds, the ship’s weapons test gains a Bonus die (+1B). Hand-held weapons are too small to have any effect on an opposing ship, but can be used against those on the decks. Fire is the exception to this rule, being used to set flamable objects, such as decks, and sails, on fire. The following special manoeuvres can be made by  83 Chapter 11.   Gamemaster Tools

=== PAGE 86 ===

Type of Ship   Crew   Cost (SP)   Manoeuvrability   Speed   Structure Points Cargo  One-masted   10   5000   +20%   6 Knots   20   8 Tons Two-masted   20   15000   -   5 Knots   40   15 Tons Three-masted   30   50000   -20%   4 Knots   60   30 Tons  Table 11.2: Ship Types a ship in combat range. One manoeuvre is allowed per round. Each manoeuvre needs a Sailing skill test by the captain, as indicated above.  ▶   Broadside  If the skill test succeeds, two attacks with a ship’s weap- ons can be made instead of one.  ▶   Evade  If the Sailing test succeeds, the opponent cannot use the broadside, ram, or boarding manoeuvres.   Further, the vessel can escape combat range (out to contact range) if the other vessel allows it or the Sailing test succeeds as an opposed roll.  ▶   Ram  The other vessel is rammed if an opposed Sailing test succeeds. A ramming attack does D6 points of damage per mast. If the ship performing this manoeuvre lacks a battering ram, it also takes half the damage i