e tests are either applied to individuals, where each character rolls individually against the Influencer, or against crowds, were one roll is made to resist based upon an average Persistence for the entire crowd.  2.6.11   ⋆   Language ( IN T   + 50/ IN T   )  The Language skill is a separate skill for each language the character knows. Their native language gets a +50%. Every character with a Language skill of 50% or more is fluent in that language, although they are likely to have an accent if it is not their native language.  2.6.12   ⋆   Lore ( IN T   )  The Lore skill is actually an umbrella term for several different skills, each of which must be improved sepa- rately. Each Lore skill defines an area of knowledge for the character and skill tests are made whenever a player wants to see if their character knows something about the subject at hand. Possible Lores is only limited by a player’s imagina- tion.   A list of potential study areas of Lore is listed here:   alchemy, art, astronomy, gambling, geography, heraldry, law, logistics, military tactics, philosophy, poi- sons.  2.6.13   ⋆   Mechanisms ( DEX   +   IN T   )  Usually, a character will simply make a Mechanisms test in order to succeed at assembling or disassembling a de- vice, with appropriate bonuses or penalties decided upon by the Gamemaster.   If a device has been designed to specifically resist attempts at disassembly, the Mecha- nisms test becomes opposed by the Mechanisms skill of the character that created it. Mechanisms is also used for picking a lock or disas- sembling a trap. This usually takes at least one minute (12 Combat Rounds) to perform, whereas larger or par- ticularly complex devices will take longer.  2.6.14   ⋆   Natural Lore ( IN T   + 10 )  Broadly speaking this Lore deals with the character’s knowledge of the natural world.   It covers several spe- cialist areas.  Animal:   This covers the ability to recognise an animal, know its feeding habits, breeding cycle, habitats and so on.   A character with a skill of at least 50% may try to domesticate a wild animal, making a skill test after every full week of training. If the character also has a Riding skill of at least 50% and the animal is capable of being ridden, they may train the animal to ride during this period. The character may later train the animal not to panic in battle and to strike at his enemies. This takes a further period of training, with the character making a skill test at the end of each week to succeed.  Plant:   A character can identify plants in the wild, dis- cover good places to grow crops, decide which plants are edible and what unusual properties they may pos- sess.  Mineral:   This skill allows the character to detect pre- cious metals and stones, detect fault lines and other dangerous features in the rock.  Survival:   One Survival test will be required every day that a character lacks either food, water or a safe place to sleep.   Success indicates the character manages to find whatever they are lacking – failure means they will go without which, over several days, could result in very serious consequences.   Survival tests are not used when the character is in a city or town.  Tracking   A character can track in the wilderness and is able to locate the tracks of a specific creature and fol- low them. A test must be made to locate the trail and then again every ten minutes they are being followed.  Weather:   The character can predict basic changes in the weather.  2.6.15   ⋆   Perception ( IN T   +   P OW   )  The Perception skill is used to represent the five senses of the character when detecting objects or other characters. For example, a common use of the Perception skill is as a straight skill test to detect hidden objects in a room, or as an opposed test to detect a hidden character.  15 Chapter 2.   Skills

=== PAGE 18 ===

2.6.16   ⋆   Performance ( CHA   + 10 )  A successful test with this skill will result in the au- dience or partner being pleased by the character’s per- formance.   This skill covers acting, composing poetry, dancing, singing, readings and playing an instrument.  2.6.17   ⋆   Persistence ( P OW   + 10 )  Persistence represents a character’s mental willpower. It is used to resist the effects of magic and often against another character’s attempt to use the Influence skill against them.  2.6.18   ⋆   Ranged Combat ( DEX   +   IN T   )  This skill covers the use of missile weapons, such as bows, crossbows, thrown spears and thrown daggers. It is cov- ered in more detail in the Combat chapter.  2.6.19   ⋆   Resilience ( CON   +   P OW   )  This is a measure of how physically tough a character is.   The higher a character’s Resilience, the more likely they are to handle adverse physical conditions, such as weathering a vicious sandstorm, surviving in a drought, or overcoming the effects of poison or disease.  2.6.20   ⋆   Riding ( DEX   +   P OW   )  If a character is riding a creature with the help of saddle and stirrups, at not more than a walking pace across flat terrain, then a Riding test will never be required. Tests are required when a character wants to do something out of the ordinary with a mount – such as traverse treach- erous terrain, jump obstacles, ride bareback and so on.  2.6.21   ⋆   Sailing ( DEX   +   IN T   )  This covers small water-borne craft propelled manually by oars or paddles, commonly known as boats, and larger craft   powered by sail or rows of oars. Travelling across calm water does not usually require a skill test but ad- verse conditions such as currents and weather can bestow penalties.  2.6.22   ⋆   Streetwise ( CHA   +   P OW   )  Streetwise allows a character to find fences for stolen goods, black markets and general information. Such uses of Streetwise normally require a minimum of 1D4 hours. Streetwise also covers following people down crowded city streets without them being noticed.  2.6.23   ⋆   Trade ( IN T   + 10 )  This skill is primarily used when characters trade, barter or otherwise negotiate over the sale of goods.   In such transactions a successful Opposed Test using the Trade of the buyer versus the Trade of the seller is needed for the buyer to get the best deal.   If the buyer wins they get a discount; -10% for a success, -20% for a critical. If the seller wins they can sell the item for more; +10% for a success and +20% for a critical.   If the opponent fumbles their roll, double the increase or decrease. The Trade skill also enables the character to deter- mine the value placed on something by others; estimat- ing its market value.   Particularly common or obscure objects might give a bonus or penalty to the skill test. Success will allow a character to guess the average mon- etary value of the object, normally guessing accurately to within 10% of its actual value.  2.6.24   ⋆   Unarmed Combat ( DEX   +   ST R )  This skill covers the use of natural attacks. For humans this is punching and kicking (1D3 damage) as well as grappling.   Non-human characters may also have bite, horns, claw and tail attacks.  16   Chapter 2.   Skills

=== PAGE 19 ===

CHAPTER 3  Equipment  Fantasy roleplaying games can be thought of as a form of cooperative improvised theatre. You could think of the players as the actors and the Gamemaster as the director and production team providing the stage and scenery, a huge big budget supporting cast and every prop that the actors could possibly need.   This chap- ter deals with the props, the equipment that the player characters will be using.  3.1 In-game Economics  These rules do not provide details for trading and fan- tasy world economics. Although dry economic markets are unlikely to feature heavily in adventure stories, the exploits of daring and wily merchant adventurers are.  3.1.1   ⋆   Availability of Goods  The equipment lists serve as ‘game tools’ to allow players to quickly and easily buy equipment for their characters. The range of goods listed at the quoted prices is only going to be available in a large metropolis with organised markets and districts given over to shops and mercantile activity. In less prosperous cities and towns there is a smaller range available, sometimes at higher costs. In rural ar- eas, only local produce and a small amount of locally crafted goods can be bought at a reasonable price. There might be oddities to this model and these can lead to further adventure. Example  A village without an armourer has a large cache of old armour and weapons for sale at a good price.   This is because a local monster living in a nearby cave has been ambushing and killing adventurers for years and then trading their equipment to the villagers. In turn, the villagers oblige by sending a steady stream of fresh and inexperienced adventurers, such as the recently arrived player characters, to its lair.  3.1.2   ⋆   Barter  Coins are the main exchange method for the landed no- bility and rich merchants. Barter is the main method of exchanging goods for people outside of the main urban areas. In such transactions successful Opposed Test us- ing the Trade of the buyer versus the Trade of the seller are needed for the buyer to get the best deal.  3.1.3   ⋆   Consequences  The main thing to remember is that with any item of equipment there are consequences in their use as well as benefits.   The most obvious consequence is encum- brance. A heavily armoured and equipped character will be slowed, unable to use skills as effectively and will be- come fatigued more easily. A less obvious effect is that an obviously well equipped character becomes a target for both minor and major theft. From the opportunistic thief who desires the PC’s new sword to the more organised bandit group who tar- gets the party because they believe that they have a stash of treasure back at their base because of all the flashy new equipment they are wearing. There might also be social consequences. In civilised towns and cities, prominent displays of arms and armour may unsettle and upset the locals and bring about the unwanted attention of the Watch who want to make sure that the characters are not violent troublemakers.   In some more draconian fantasy lands there may even be laws and social codes that dictate what arms and armour a citizen may own and in what situations they may carry it.  3.1.4   ⋆   Currency  Coins are usually created in mints tightly controlled by the local nobility, appointed by the local ruler, whose head appears on one side of the coin. Other sources of coin are usually the treasure troves of monsters, whose assets are brought into the economy by enterprising ad- venturers. Currency can be based upon whatever is valued by the culture using it. Being a fantasy game, many vari- ant systems of currency can be created. For example, a system that uses the teeth of slain dragons or magical gemstones enchanted with minor magic that is useful in everyday life can be used as an exchange mechanism. For ease of use here’s a simple coin based currency that will be used throughout the rest of this book to give value to an item.  10 Copper Pieces (CP) = 1 Silver Piece (SP) 10 Silver Pieces (SP) = 1 Gold Piece (GP)  17  Chapter 3.   Equipment

=== PAGE 20 ===

3.2 The Equipment Lists  The rest of this chapter is given over to equipment lists. These lists provide the cost of the item and detail any game effects.   They also give an Encumbrance value (ENC) for the item in question.   This is a value which rates both the weight and how physically unwieldy an item is.   This is for the Encumbrance rules given on page 80.  3.3 Close Combat Weapons  All Close Combat weapons use the Close Combat skill. Each close combat weapon is characterised by the fol- lowing qualities:  Type:   This shows how the weapon is wielded and other special rules (see Close Combat Weapon Types on page 18).  Damage Dice:   The damage the weapon deals on a suc- cessful attack.  STR/DEX:   The minimum STR and DEX scores needed to easily wield this weapon. If either of the Character- istics are below these minimums, a Penalty die (-1P) is applied to a character’s skill when attacking and parrying with this weapon.  ENC:   The weapon’s Encumbrance.   The weight and bulk of the weapon.  Size:   Weapons are rated in the following size categories: Light, Medium, Heavy and Huge. Weapons need to be of the same category or larger to block all damage. If the defending weapon is one category less they block half damage. If two categories less they cannot block the damage.  Cost:   The cost in silver pieces to purchase this weapon.  ▶   Close Combat Weapon Types  1H:   This weapon must be used one-handed.  2H:   This weapon must be used two-handed.  Flex:   This weapon can be used two-handed.   When used in two hands, it gains +2 damage and can be used by someone with a STR 2 less than that listed.  Set:   This weapon may be set against a charge.   The wielder must state, however, at the start of combat how it is being wielded and must take a Change Stance action to alter its usage.  Range:   This weapon suffers no penalty when thrown. Note that improvised and primitive weapons: such as a stone hatchet, stone spear or a convenient log picked up and used as a club, do the same damage as the base weapon -1.  3.4 Ranged Weapons  Each ranged weapon is characterised by the following qualities:  Type:   This shows how the weapon is wielded and other special rules (see Ranged Combat Weapon Types on page 18).  Damage Dice:   The damage the weapon deals on a suc- cessful attack.  Range:   This is the effective range of the weapon. A tar- get within the weapon’s range may be attacked with- out penalty.   A target within double the weapon’s range may be attacked, but the attacker rolls with two Penalty dice (-2P). Attacks against targets be- yond double the weapon’s range automatically fail.  STR/DEX:   The minimum STR and DEX scores re- quired to easily wield this weapon.   If either of the Characteristics are below these minimums, a Penalty die (-1P) is applied to a character’s roll when attack- ing and parrying with this weapon.  ENC:   The weapon’s Encumbrance.   The weight and bulk of the weapon.  Cost:   The cost in silver pieces to purchase this weapon.  ▶   Ranged Combat Weapon Types  1H:   This weapon must be used one-handed.  2H:   This weapon must be used two-handed.   A small shield (e.g.   buckler) can be strapped to the forearm but cannot be used whilst wielding or shooting this weapon.  Close:   This weapon suffers no penalty when used in Close Combat.  Range:   This weapon suffers no penalty at this distance.  18   Chapter 3.   Equipment

=== PAGE 21 ===

Weapon   Type   Damage Dice   STR/DEX   ENC   Size   Cost  Arming Sword   1H   1D8   9/9   2   Medium   150 SP Ball and Chain   1H   1D8   9/9   2   Medium   120 SP Battleaxe   1H   1D8   9/9   2   Medium   120 SP Club   Flex   1D6   5/9   1   Light   20 SP Dagger   1H/Range   1D4+1   -/-   -   Light   20 SP Great Axe   2H   2D8   13/5   4   Heavy   200 SP Great Hammer   2H   2D8   13/5   4   Heavy   200 SP Greatsword   2H   2D8   13/9   4   Heavy   300 SP Hatchet   1H/Range   1D6   5/9   1   Light   20 SP Lance   Flex/Set   1D10   11/9   3   Heavy   150 SP Longspear   2H/Set   1D8+1   9/5   2   Medium   30 SP Longsword   Flex   1D8   13/11   2   Medium   250 SP Mace   Flex   1D8   9/9   2   Medium   120 SP Military Flail   2H   2D8   13/5   4   Heavy   200 SP Polearm   2H/Set   1D8   9/9   3   Heavy   200 SP Quarterstaff   2H   1D8   5/9   2   Medium   20 SP Scimitar   1H   1D8   9/9   2   Medium   150 SP Shield (small)   -   1D4   -/-   1   Medium   50 SP Shield (medium)   -   1D6   9/-   2   Heavy   150 SP Shield (large)   -   1D6   13/-   3   Huge   300 SP Shortspear   Flex/Set/Range   1D6   5/5   2   Medium   20 SP Shortsword   1H   1D6   5/5   1   Medium   100 SP Unarmed   -   1D3   -/-   -   -   - War Hammer   1H   1D8   9/9   2   Medium   120 SP  Table 3.1: Close Combat Weapons  ▶   Using Ranged Weapons in Close Combat  If used in close combat, a ranged weapon is treated as an improvised weapon, doing damage equal to its closest hand-to-hand equivalent if that is less than its ranged weapon damage.  3.5 Armour  Each piece of armour is characterised by the following qualities:  AP:   How many armour points this type of armour pro- vides.   In case you need variable armour values use the value in parenthesis (usefull, if the averages give no chance of damaging).  ENC:   The armour’s Encumbrance.   The weight and bulk of the armour. The character’s base Combat Or- der is reduced by the ENC value of the armour.  Cost:   The cost in silver pieces to purchase this armour.  ▶   Armour Descriptions  Leather:   Either padded leather or boiled and stiffened leather or linen armour.  Ringmail:   Metal rings sown onto a padded leather suit.  Scalemail:   Metal scales sown onto a padded leather suit.  Chainmail:   Links of chain made into a suit.  Platemail:   Steel plates that cover the body,   over a chain mail backing.  19  Chapter 3.   Equipment

=== PAGE 22 ===

Weapon   Type   Damage Dice   Range   STR/DEX   ENC   Cost  Dagger   Close   1D4+1   STR x m   -/9   -   30 SP Crossbow (Heavy) 1   2H   2D6   150m   9/9   2   350 SP Dart   1D3   STR x m   -/9   -   15 SP Crossbow (Light) 1   2H   1D8   125m   5/9   1   150 SP Hatchet   Close   1D6   STR x m   -/9   1   25 SP Improvised (Rock)   1d4   STR x m   5/5   1   - Javelin   1d6   STR x 2m   5/9   1   20 SP Longbow   2H   1d10   150m   13/9   1   150 SP Shortbow   2H   1d8   75m   9/9   1   75 SP Shortspear   Close   1d6   STR x 2m   5/9   2   20 SP Sling   1H   1d6   50m   -/9   -   5 SP Whip   Close   1d3   5m   -/9   -   50 SP 1. To reload a heavy crossbow requires a full combat round while a light crossbow requires both movement action and reaction (see Combat Chapter for details).  Table 3.2: Ranged Combat Weapons  Ammunition   ENC   Cost  Arrows (10)   -   1 SP Blowgun darts (10)   -   2 SP Crossbow bolts (10)   -   2 SP Sling bullets (10)   -   5 CP  Table 3.3: Ranged Weapon Ammunition  Armour   AP   ENC   Cost  Leather   2 (1D3)   3   500 SP Ringmail   3 (1D4)   4   1000 SP Scalemail   4 (1D6)   6   1500 SP Chainmail   5 (2D4)   7   3000 SP Platemail   6 (2D6)   9   9000 SP  Table 3.4: Armours  ▶   Effects of SIZ on Armour  Armour made for a character of SIZ 1 to 5 will have its cost and ENC halved from that shown on table 3.4. Characters of SIZ 21 or higher will double the cost and ENC for armour made for them. Also note that:  Characters may try using plate armour not de- signed for them but the ENC will be doubled.  Characters may not wear more than one type of armour, i.e. layer armour, to get increased Armour Points.  3.6 General Items  Backpack:   It can hold 20 ENC of equipment.  Block & Tackle:   Adds a Bonus die (+1B) to Mecha- nisms tests to make or disarm large traps and makes Engineering tests possible in some circumstances.   It requires at least 10m of rope to function.  Candle, 1 Hour:   A candle illuminates a one metre radius.   Any wind stronger than a slight breeze will extinguish a candle.  Climbing Kit:   A climbing kit provides a Bonus die (+1B) to any Athletics skill tests made to climb.  Crowbar:   Adds a Bonus die (+1B) to brute force Ath- letics tests. If used as a weapon, it is considered a club (wielded with a Penalty die -1P).  Healing Kit:   A healing kit is good for five uses (whether the skill test succeeds or fails).  20   Chapter 3.   Equipment

=== PAGE 23 ===

Item   ENC   Cost  Backpack   1   5 SP Bedroll   1   1 SP Block & Tackle   1   15 SP Bottle, glass   -   2 SP Candle, 1 hour   -   1 CP Chain, 2 metres   2   40 SP Climbing Kit   1   25 SP Craft Tools   2   75 SP Crowbar   1   25 SP Healing Kit   -   25 SP Fish Hook   -   1 CP Fishing Kit   1   15 SP Flint & Tinder   -   5 CP Grappling Hook   -   5 SP Hammer   -   1 SP Ladder, 3 metres   4   2 SP Lantern   1   10 SP Lock Picks   -   75 SP Mining Pick   1   35 SP Musical   Instru- ment 2   70 SP Oil, Flask   1   1 SP Papyrus, Sheet   -   1 SP Quiver   -   2 SP Rope, 10 metres   2   10 SP Sack, Large   1   5 CP Sack, Small   -   2 CP Scythe   2   30 SP Slingbag   1   5 CP Spade   1   25 SP Torch   -   4 CP Waterskin   1   5 CP Writing Kit   1   45 SP  Table 3.5: General Items  Fish Hook:   This item allows a character to use his Natural Lore skill to catch a fish without suffering a penalty on the test.  Fishing Kit:   The fishing kit grants a character a Bonus die (+1B) to his Natural Lore test to catch fish.  Flint & Tinder:   A character with flint and tinder can build a fire in one minute under normal conditions without having to roll his Natural Lore skill.  Grappling Hook:   It will support the weight of 50 ENC or 50 SIZ, or any combination thereof.  Hammer:   If used as a weapon, it is treated as a club (wielded with a Penalty die -1P). Hammers may be used on inanimate objects without being destroyed.  Lantern:   A lantern provides clear illumination out to a three metre radius. It will burn for two hours on a flask of oil.  Lock Picks:   Adds a Bonus die (+1B) to Mechanisms tests to unlock a locking device.  Mining Pick:   If used as a weapon, it is considered a club (wielded with a Penalty die -1P). Mining picks may be used on inanimate objects without being de- stroyed.  Oil, Flask:   A flask of oil is enough to fuel a lantern for two hours or, if broken on the ground and ignited, enough to sustain a small fire for one minute.  Quiver:   Quivers can hold up to 30 arrows or crossbow bolts.  Rope, 10 Metres:   A standard rope can support the weight of 50 ENC or 50 SIZ, or any combination thereof.  Sack, Large:   Able to hold 10 ENC of equipment.  Sack, Small:   A small sack can hold 5 ENC of equip- ment.  Scythe:   If used as a weapon, it is considered a polearm (wielded with a Penalty die -1P).  Slingbag:   It can carry 15 ENC of equipment.  Spade:   If used as a weapon, it is considered a club (wielded with a Penalty die -1P).  Torch, 1 Hour:   It will burn for one hour. A torch il- luminates a three metre radius. If used as a weapon, it is considered a club (wielded with a Penalty die - 1P), except that it does not inflict normal damage – instead, it inflicts 1D4 fire damage and a fumble or critical hit will also extinguish the brand.  Waterskin:   A waterskin can hold enough water to sus- tain an adventurer for two days.  21  Chapter 3.   Equipment

=== PAGE 24 ===

3.7 Transportation  Some example prices for trading animals as well as trans- portation services can be found in the following table.  Animal   Cost  Bison   200 SP Bull   250 SP Cart   75 SP Cat   2 SP Chariot   600 SP Cow   150 SP Dog, Domestic   2 SP Dog, Hunting   25 SP Fowl   1 SP Goat   50 SP Hawk   400 SP Horse, Draft   400 SP Horse, Riding   350 SP Horse, Combat Trained   500 SP Mule   125 SP Ox   200 SP Pig   50 SP Saddle and Bridle   75 SP Sheep   30 SP Travel (by Post-Horse)   2 SP per kilometre Travel (by Ship)   1 SP per kilometre Travel (by Wagon)   5 SP per kilometre Wagon   300 SP  Table 3.6: Animals and Transportation  3.8 Food & Lodging  Some example prices for food and lodging can be found in the following table.  Animal   Cost  Lodging, Poor   2 CP Lodging, Average   1 SP Lodging, Superior   5 SP Food and Drink, Poor, 1 Day   1 CP Food and Drink, Average, 1 Day   5 CP Food and Drink, Superior, 1 Day   2 SP Trail Rations, 1 Day   5 CP  Table 3.7: Food and Lodging  22   Chapter 3.   Equipment

=== PAGE 25 ===

CHAPTER 4  Combat  Fantasy Crux is a swords and sorcery game and, as such, swords will be drawn during epic adventures with the aim of spilling blood. Be it for glory, honour, fame or riches, when all else fails violence is the means of achieving these goals. The characters come from worlds that are rife with conflict, where warriors are required to wage wars against evil neighbours, wandering bandits and foul monsters that come out of the wilderness. It should be remembered that Fantasy Crux is not a game purely about combat, just as it is not purely about magic. It would not be unusual for whole sessions to pass without any physical violence. However, in time, characters will get involved in dangerous life threatening fights. This chapter provides you with a straightforward and direct system for playing out action packed and deadly combat.  4.1 Combat is Tough  Characters that have weapon skills less than 100% are at the whim of the dice to determine whether or not they land a blow in combat. Anything you do to increase your character’s chances to hit, or hit first, will stand in your favour and make the outcome more certain. Once you are hit in combat, things start getting messy.   Your character has a relatively low number of hit points. In a couple of blows, or one lucky blow, these hit points can easily be reduced to zero, which indicates that the character has died.   Make sure your character can dodge, parry or has magical protection. With Major Wounds your character is especially at risk of grievous and permanent harm every time they decide to use vio- lence to solve a problem. Numbers count.   If you are facing off against mul- tiple opponents, even weak and unskilled ones, you are quickly going to run out of attacks and reactions.   In practical terms this means that your character may, at best, reduce the number of attackers by one per round, while only being able to protect themselves against one of several incoming attacks. Even Masters are vulnerable.   A weapon skill over 100% is no guarantee of survival, as characters can be brought low by a lucky critical hit, or by an opponent who has lured them into an ambush and stacked the odds against them through surprise and careful planning. These harsh realities mean that players tend to avoid combats where they do not have a very good chance to win. Instead of wading into masses of weaker opponents,  hoping that lucky dice rolls will see them through, they carefully plan ambushes, where they have the benefit of terrain and supporting soldiers from the local militia that will allow them to wipe out the majority of the enemy before the first proper round of combat. They will use any of their Powers to boost their damage, chances to hit, or armour and in general try to get an advantage.  4.2 Summary of Combat  Work out encounter distance:   The Gamemaster de- termines how far away the hostile group is to the player characters, either at Range or Close.  Start Combat time:   Combat is divided into rounds. A single round has a duration of five seconds of time, giving 12 rounds in every minute. During a round ev- ery character can perform one action. Combat rounds cycle through the following steps:  Determine Order: At the start of every combat each character rolls 1D10 and adds it to their Combat Order. The higher the result the earliest the character acts.  Characters Take Actions & Reaction: In a com- bat round each character gets one Combat Ac- tion, one Movement Action and one Reaction.  23 Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 26 ===

Combat Actions, such as attacks, and Movement Actions take place in Combat Order. The charac- ter with the highest order will act first, followed by the character with the second-highest order, and so on until the character with the lowest or- der acts.   Reactions, such as parries, dodges or opportunity attacks, are made during this pro- cess as they are needed.  End of Combat Round: Once all eligible charac- ters have acted in the combat round, it is over. If there are characters still engaged in combat with enemies, another combat round begins. Example  For example: Lura has DEX 15 and INT 14.   She is wearing leather armour so has Combat Order 13 (15 minus 2). She rolls a 7 in her 1D10 for a total of 20 Combat Order.   An unarmoured Goblin has DEX 13 and INT 10 and rolled a 4 for a total of 16. Thus the Combat Order is Lura acting before the Goblin.  4.3 Encounter Distance  Not all combats start with the two sides, the players and their opponents, directly facing each other within swords reach.   At the beginning of a combat, or potential com- bat, the Gamemaster must determine which of the two distances the encounter starts at. Close is a range of two metres or less and is the dis- tance at which a character can engage in either Close or Unarmed combat. Ranged, beyond two metres up to double the range of the missile weapon a character is holding, is the dis- tance at which the character can engage in ranged com- bat. Ranged combat typically happens out in the open countryside where groups of combatants can see each over coming over the horizon or emerging in the distance from old ruined buildings.  4.3.1   ⋆   Some Basic Rules  A Combat Round lasts five seconds.  You get one Combat Action, usually an attack, one Movement Action and one Reaction, usually a defensive action, per combat round.  You can move your Movement Rate in a Combat Round without losing your Action or Reaction.  You can run twice your Movement Rate in a Com- bat Round but you may only Dodge as your Reac- tion.  To attack you roll against your Close Combat, Ranged Combat or Unarmed Combat skill depending on the type of weapon you are using.  When attacked you can either Parry (use the Close Combat or Unarmed skill) or Dodge as a Reaction.  If your character successfully Dodges an attack they take no damage.  If your opponent successfully Parries your attack their weapon or shield reduces the damage your attack does.  If you successfully hit, your opponent takes dam- age to their hit points equal to Weapon Damage rolled + your Damage Modifier - Opponent’s Ar- mour Points  4.4 Combat Actions  The actions a character may take when it is his turn to act are detailed here. A character can only choose one of the options below each round.  4.4.1   ⋆   Close Combat Actions  Charge:   If a character can move a minimum of five metres towards his opponent, then he can make a charge. He may move a distance up to - but no more than - twice his Movement Rate.   This must be in a straight line and he must end up adjacent to an enemy. When the move is complete, a close combat attack may be made against the enemy. If the attack is suc- cessful, the character gains a bonus of +1D6 damage. He loses his reaction for the round that he charges on. Characters may not charge uphill and gain the damage modifier.  Close Combat Attack:   The character can make a sin- gle close combat attack.   In addition to the normal attack, there are the following special attacks.  24   Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 27 ===

All out Attack: The attacker gives up their Re- action for the round but gains a second attack, which happens straight after the first attack. Both attacks are rolled with a Penalty die (-1P) due to the loss of skill during this frenzied attack. This type of attack cannot be combined with any other special attack.  Great Attack: This attack is made using swords, axes or maces where the attacker has enough room to wind up the weapon for a really forceful blow. The attacker rolls with a Bonus die (+1B) to attack and automatically does the maximum damage modifier value but loses his reaction for that combat round.  Disarming Attack: Attacker rolls with a Penalty die (-1P) to his weapon skill with the aim of dis- arming their opponent either of their weapon or shield.   If the attack is successful and the op- ponent fails to parry or dodge, the weapon or shield is thrown 1D6 metres away from the owner. Larger opponents will have a Bonus die (+1B) or more to their skill roll for this test.  Trip Attack: Attacker rolls with a Penalty die (- 1P) to his weapon skill with the aim of tripping their opponent. If the attack is successful and the opponent fails to parry or dodge, he falls prone. Quadruped opponents or larger opponents will have a Bonus die (+1B) or more to their roll for this test.  Knockout Attack: Attacker rolls with a Penalty die (-1P) to his weapon skill with the aim of knocking out their opponent. If the attack is suc- cessful and the opponent fails to parry or dodge, and the damage done is equal to a major wound then the opponent is knocked out without suf- fering any damage.   If the damage is equal to a minor wound the opponent takes the minimum damage of the weapon but is not knocked out.  Knock-Back Attack: Requires a successful shield attack (with a Penalty die (-1P) on the roll if in off-hand).   If the opponent fails to parry or dodge he takes no damage but is knocked-back 2 metres.   Larger opponents will have a Bonus die (+1B) or more to their roll. If the opponent fails they need to make an Athletics roll with a Penalty die (-1P) or also fall prone.  Intimidate/Persuade:   The character tries to get the other side to surrender or flee. This can either be tar- geted at a single enemy or a group.   Do an Opposed roll using the character’s Influence vs.   the enemies’ Persistence, applying the roll as listed below. Groups roll once using the Persistence of the group leader. If the group leader’s Influence skill is higher than his Persistence, then they may use that skill instead. Ap- ply the following Bonus/Penalty dice to the enemy’s  25 Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 28 ===

skill rolls depending on the state of the enemy.  two Bonus dice (+2B)   if the enemy is still at full strength, or has only taken some minor wounds. Bonus die (+1B)   if the enemy out numbers the player’s side, but have had   at   least   20%   losses either   in   numbers   or   hit points. Penalty die (-1P)   if the enemy is fewer than the   player’s   side   and   has taken some wounds. two Penalty dice (-2P)   if   the   enemy   has   taken more than half hit points in wounds and/or has seen half his group incapacitated by the players. Note: these modifiers are not cumulative. Apply the one that best describes the situation.  If the enemy is at full strength and/or outnumbers the player characters then only a critical roll for Influence vs a failed Persistence roll will make them surrender. A fumbled Persistence roll will see the enemy suddenly rout. When the player is attempting the roll they must de- clare whether they are targeting the whole group or singling out an individual. The Gamemaster has the final say on who is targeted and if the attempt is pos- sible at all. Example  Rurik is fighting a group of four goblins, one of whom he has already badly wounded while the other three are still at full hit points. If he decides to single out the wounded Goblin, then the Goblin’s Persistence roll to resist Rurik’s taunt- ing and the resultant urge to flee will be rolled with a Penalty die (-1P). If he decides to target the whole group, which as a whole is undamaged and outnum- bers him, then the Goblins will roll with a Bonus die (+1B) to their Persistence.  The character need not speak the same language as the opponent they are trying to Influence, but they must be capable of some sort of sign, gesture or body language that the opponent is capable of understand- ing.  Set Weapon:   A character can spend their Action set- ting the shaft of a weapon, such as a spear or polearm, in the ground in anticipation of a charge from an op- ponent. When the charge actually comes the charac- ter automatically gets an attack roll with a Bonus die (+1B) before the charging character gets their attack. If the character makes any other action or reaction before the charge, the weapon becomes ‘unset’.  Situation   Skill Modifier  Target is helpless   Automatic Critical Target is prone or attacked from behind (flanked) +1B Attacking or defending while on higher ground or on mount (unless wielding a weapon two size cate- gories smaller) +1B Attacking or defending while prone   -1P Attacking or defending while on unstable ground -1P Attacking or defending while un- derwater -2P Defending while on lower ground or   against   mounted   foe   (unless wielding a weapon two size cate- gories larger) -1P Fighting in partial darkness   -1P Fighting in darkness   -2P Fighting in pitch dark or blinded   -3P  Table 4.1:   Close Combat Situational Bonus/Penalty Dice  ▶   Making Close Combat Attacks  Making the Attack: To attack, the player simply rolls D100 and compares it to the character’s Close Combat skill which may be rolled with Bonus/Penalty dice for specific situations or special attacks. If a character rolls equal to or lower than his Weapon skill, he has hit his target.   If a character rolls greater than his Weapon skill, he has missed his target.  Target Reaction: If the enemy has already reacted this round, or chooses not to React against this at- tack, then this attack is unopposed. Move straight on to Damage Resolution. If the attack is opposed, the defender makes a Dodge or Parry (see below).  Damage Resolution:   If the attack is successful, damage is rolled. Each weapon has its own Dam- age score, to which the attacker’s Damage Modifier is added in order to determine the total damage being dealt. If the defender is armoured then the armour will absorb some of this damage. Reduce the attack’s damage by the armour points (AP) of the defender’s armour.  Damage Application: Apply any remaining dam- age to the defender’s hit points.  4.4.2   ⋆   Unarmed Combat Actions  The following are potential actions:  Unarmed Combat Attack:   The character can make a single Unarmed Combat Attack.  26   Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 29 ===

Attacker   Defender’s Reaction   Result  Fumble   No need to roll   Attacker fumbles. Failure   No need to roll   Attacker fails to hit defender. Success   Fumble   Attacker hits, defender takes damage rolled minus armour points and fumbles. Success   Failure   Attacker hits, defender takes damage rolled minus armour points. Success   Success   If dodging defender avoids the attack. If parrying then if attacker’s weapon smaller or equal in size to defender’s weapon all damage avoided. If parrying weapon is a rank smaller half damage, if two ranks smaller then no damage can be avoided. Success   Critical   Defender avoids attack and takes no damage. If parrying the weapon size penalty does not come into it. Critical   Fumble   Attacker does two of: maximum damage, ignore armour, trip, disarm, knock-back, knockout, free attack. Defender fumbles. Critical   Failure   Attacker does two of: maximum damage, ignore armour, trip, disarm, knock-back, knockout, free attack. Critical   Success   Similar to Success:Failure above. Critical   Critical   Similar to Success:Success above.  Table 4.2: Summary of Combat Results  Natural Weapon attack:   Using the characters’s nat- ural weapons be it claw, bite, kick or fist.  Grapple Attack:   The attacker attempts to grab an opponent and an opposed Unarmed Combat Attack is made. If the attacker wins they may choose to in- flict pain, immobilise or throw their opponent.  ▶   Making Unarmed Combat Attacks  Roll against Unarmed Combat skill to determine if the attack is successful. If an Unarmed Attack is parried by a crafted or natural weapon, then the attacker will imme- diately suffer the rolled damage of the parrying weapon, with no damage modifier. This is in addition to the nor- mal effect of the parry.  ▶   Natural Weapons  Natural Weapons such as the teeth and claws of monsters are counted as weapons and not Unarmed Attacks. The damage they deal is listed in the monster’s description. They may parry other Natural Weapons or Unarmed Attacks, but not crafted weapon attacks.  ▶   Damage Modifier  Damage Modifier is applied normally to Unarmed Com- bat.  ▶   Grappling  Grapple Attack is made in the same way as a normal Unarmed or Natural Weapon attack but must be de- clared as such before any dice are rolled. Should the at- tacker hit with his grapple attack, no damage is initially caused. Instead, the attacker then opposes his Unarmed Combat Skill to the target’s Unarmed Combat Skill, in a roll similar to an opposed skill test:  Grapple Fails: The grapple attempt fails and the attack is considered to have missed.  Grapple Succeeds:   The two combatants are now grappling and the attacker may immediately follow up on this success by Throwing, Inflicting pain, Disarm or Immobilise the target.  Break Free:   To break out of a grapple, the character makes an opposed Grapple Attack.   The characters may only use the Unarmed Combat Skill in this case. If the character succeeds they managed to break free and the combatants are no longer grappling, though they will be adjacent.  Immobilise:   While immobilised, enemies are consid- ered helpless.   Once per round the defender may at- tempt to break free.  27 Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 30 ===

Situation   Skill Roll  Attacker is   1/3   larger in SIZ   Bonus die (+1B) Attacker is   1/2   larger in SIZ   two Bonus dice (+2B)  Table 4.3: Grappling Modifiers  Inflict Pain:   The grappler inflicts damage of 1D4 + damage modifiers.   Armour does not help. Once per round the defender may attempt to break free or may attempt to turn the tables on their attacker by counter grappling.  Throw:   The opponent is thrown 2 metres and suffers 1D4 damage. Armour does not help.   The grapple ends in this case.  Disarm:   The opponent is forced to drop whatever was holding. The difference in SIZ between characters matters con- siderably.   Consult table 4.3 for some guidelines.   For greater differences the Gamemaster will determine if it makes sense to roll dice.  4.4.3   ⋆   Ranged Combat Actions  The following are potential actions:  Ranged Combat Attack:   The character can make a single ranged combat attack. In addition to the nor- mal attack, there is also the following special attack.  Aim:   If a character aims for a round he adds a Bonus die (+1B) to the character’s Ranged Combat skill. This bonus only applies to the first attack the character makes with the weapon, which must be fired at the target being aimed at. A character can take no Reac- tion while aiming without losing the aim bonus.  ▶   Throwing Close Combat Weapons  If a close combat weapon that isn’t designed to be thrown is hurled at an enemy then it has a range of 8m and suffers a penalty to the attack equal to its ENC x 10. Ranged Combat skill is used.  ▶   Using Ranged Weapons  All ranged attacks are handled in same manner as close combat attacks, with the following exceptions:  Charge:   Ranged attacks may not be used as part of a charge.  Range:   A target within the weapon’s range may be at- tacked without penalty.   A target within double the weapon’s range may be attacked, but the attacker’s weapon skill is rolled with two Penalty dice (-2P). At- tacks cannot be made at a distance beyond twice/dou- ble the weapon’s range.  Parrying:   The target may attempt to Parry a hand thrown ranged attack with a Penalty die (-1P) but may not normally Parry ranged missile weapons (such as Bows and Crossbow fire).   Shield-carrying charac- ters may Parry hand thrown missile weapons with no penalty.  Dodging:   The target may attempt to Dodge a ranged attack with a Penalty die (-1P).  Disarming:   A character may not attempt to disarm targets with ranged attacks, nor may he attempt to strike a target’s weapon or shield.  Damage Modifier:   A character may add their Dam- age modifier to ranged weapons except for crossbows.  ▶   Cover  Cover affects both ranged and close combat attacks. For missile attacks the defender benefits from the best of the shield modifier (see section 4.6) and the cover modifier below.  Partial cover (Penalty die -1P):   For example a low wall that protects the legs leaving only head and torso exposed.  Very good cover (two Penalty dice -2P):   For exam- ple a defender on a castle wall, firing from protected battlements.  Virtual total cover (Impossible / GMs discretion):  For example a castle wall with arrow slits for defenders to shot through.  28   Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 31 ===

Situation   Skill Modifier  Wind 1  High wind   -1P Fierce wind   -3P Hurricane   Attack automatically fails Target Movement 1  Target has moved 10m or more since attacker’s last Combat Ac- tion -1P Target has moved 30m or more since attacker’s last Combat Ac- tion -2P Target Visibility 1  Target obscured by smoke, mist or is in partial darkness -1P Target obscured by thick smoke, fog or is in darkness -2P Target is above SIZ 20   +1B Target Condition 1  Target is helpless   +2B Target is prone   -1P Attacker Condition 2  Attacker is prone   -2P Attacker is underwater 3 , 4   -1P Attacker is on unstable ground   -1P Attacker is blinded 4   -3P Attacker is engaged in melee 5   -2P 1.   Modifiers within these sections are not cumulative. However, modifiers from different sections are cumula- tive. Therefore, shooting at a target within a mist that has moved more than 10m since the attacker’s last Com- bat Action imparts two Penalty dice (-2P). 2. Attacker condition modifiers are cumulative. 3. Only bows and crossbows may be used underwater. 4. GMs discretion depending on the distance and the ranged weapon. 5. Per enemy; i.e.   if engaged with two enemies the modifier will be -4P.  Table 4.4: Ranged Attack Situational Modifiers  ▶   Firing into a Crowd  When firing into a crowd, the Gamemaster will deter- mine how much cover the target has from the ranged attack. The ranged attack is then resolved as normal for a target behind cover. If the attack fails to hit the target and succeeds against the unmodified attack skill, the firer has hit one of the individuals adjacent to the target chosen by the Game- master.  4.5 Movement Actions  A character may make one of the following Move Actions and unless noted otherwise does not lose either their Ac- tion or Reaction:  Change Stance:   A character may stand up from prone, or vice versa.  Fighting Retreat:   A character may move a distance up to their full Movement directly away from an enemy he is fighting. He may only defend at +1B (+2B with a Medium and Large shield).  Standard Move:   A character may move a distance up to his Movement Rate.  Sprint:   A character may move a distance up to twice their Movement Rate, forsaking their attack and only being able to dodge as a defensive reaction.  Ready Weapon:   Drawing a sword from its sheath, un- hooking an axe from one’s belt, nocking an arrow to one’s bow – all these actions take half of available movement.   A single Ready Weapon action can also include dropping a weapon currently held to the floor and then drawing a new one. Sheathing one weapon and drawing another requires the full movement as does readying two weapons.  Disengage:   A character may disengage from close com- bat but they risk a reaction attack from their oppo- nent, if a reaction is available. In such case the char- acter can dodge to avoid the attack, again if a reaction is available. Contested Movement At the Gamemaster’s discretion movement can be in- terrupted regardless of Combat Order. For example, a Player cannot make circles around an enemy just because the latter had worse Combat Order. Maybe the enemy can use their reaction to attack the Player or an opposed roll could be applicable to determine who gets an advantage, etc.  4.6 Reactions  A character can make one Reaction in a combat round. Unlike Combat Actions, Reactions are made in response to the successful hits or other actions of enemies. There are three types of Reaction, dodge, parry and opportu- nity attack:  Parries   can be made against close combat attacks.   A character can also parry hand thrown missile weapons at a -1P or without penalty if using a shield.  Dodges   can be made normally against close combat at- tacks and at a -1P penalty for ranged attacks provid- ing the target is aware of the attack.  Opportunity Attack   can be made when a character disengages from close combat. At the GM’s discretion it can apply to other contested situations as well.  29 Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 32 ===

Parry and Dodge reactions are declared after a successful attack has occurred but before its effects are applied. Resolution depends on the level of success between the participants and is described in table 4.2.  4.7 Other Actions  These actions operate under special circumstances and are not necessarily part of the normal actions and reac- tions.  Powers:   This depends on which Discipline the Power belongs to. Consult the appropriate Discipline chap- ter.  Delay:   A character may pause to assess the tactical sit- uation around him.   If a delaying character merely wishes to act after a specific character has acted, they wait until that character has finished their Combat Action.   If a delaying character wishes to interrupt a specific character’s action as it occurs, the charac- ter must make a test appropriate to his interrupting action (a weapon skill test if the character wishes to attack, for instance). Whoever wins the test acts first.  Load Crossbow:   A light crossbow requires a movement action to load while a heavy requires one full combat round.  Skill Use:   The character performs one action which re- quires the use of a skill, such as opening a locked door with the Mechanisms skill.  4.8 Critical Hits  If the D100 attack roll is not only lower than the attack skill, but also equal to or lower than the character’s crit- ical score with that skill, then the attack is considered a critical hit. In close combat a critical hit can cause two of the following effects:   do maximum damage (including the damage modifier, unless it is negative), ignore armour, free attack, trip, disarm, knock-back or knockout. Example  Rurik with his 55% Close Combat, rolls a 05, which is a critical! He chooses to do maximum damange and ignore armour. Rurik is wielding a Longsword with a damage of 1D8 and has a damage modifier of 1D6. He is fighting a heavily armoured Knight, who has the latest Plate Mail armour (AP 6).   However this Armour is completely ignored as Rurik’s sword slides through a gap in the plates doing a devastating 14 points of damage (8 from the sword and 6 from the damage modifier).  In ranged combat a