on spells. For instance, ranged spells require Sight Projection, while touch spells require Touch Projection (and likely Sight Projection too, simply so the caster can find his target efficiently). Characters using Mystic Vision can see the sensor and attack it if they wish, though it is only vulnerable to magic. Magical weapons and spells employed against the sensor will not destroy it but will instead transfer their damage directly to the caster.  ▶   Sense (Substance)  Concentration Eminently useful for finding valuables from afar, this spell has a variation for every substance imaginable. Sense (Substance) will cause all sources of the substance within range of the spell to glow an appropriate colour visible only to the caster – diamonds will gleam like ice, amber will shine like a camp fire and so on. Each point of this spell’s Magnitude allows it to penetrate one metre of rock, wood or dirt. If the source is concealed behind such a material, the surface nearest the caster will glow for a moment. The spell cannot penetrate refined metal, though it can penetrate ore.  ▶   Shapechange (Species) to (Species)  Resist (Resilience), Touch Each Shapechange spell is a separate spell.   Of all spells with multiple variations, the Shapechange spell has the most, comprising a new spell for almost ev- ery combination of creatures imaginable. The spell only works on living things – the dead or inanimate cannot be shapechanged. The Magnitude of the spell must be equal to or greater than the average SIZ of both specified species.   Thus changing a mouse (SIZ 1) into a newt (also SIZ 1) is Magnitude 1. Changing a mouse into a lion (SIZ 19) is Magnitude 19. If the spell is successful, the target will be biologically changed, gaining the STR, DEX, CON and SIZ of its new form. Its INT, POW and CHA are unchanged, and the target retains its memories and abilities (though it  58   Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 61 ===

may be unable to use some of those abilities in its new form).  ▶   Skin of Life  Touch This spell protects the recipient from suffocation by air deprivation, due to such factors as drowning or the Smother spell. Each point of Magnitude will cover three points of SIZ – thus a Magnitude 4 Skin of Life spell would sustain a SIZ 12 creature.  ▶   Smother  Concentration, Resist (Resilience Special) If successful, this spell neutralises the air surround- ing the target, making each breath stale and worthless, depriving it of oxygen. The caster must concentrate each round, in order to keep the spell operating. For the du- ration of the spell, the target will be unable to breathe, essentially drowning on dry land. When the spell begins, the target’s Resilience test determines whether it is able to gasp in one last breath before Smother cuts off the surrounding oxygen supply. If the target succeeds, it may hold its breath as normal. If it fails, it will start drowning in the next Combat Round. This spell can also be used to extinguish fires, as the flames will be starved of oxygen.   At Magnitude 1, it can extinguish a Flame, Magnitude 2 a Large Flame, Magnitude 4 a Small Fire, Magnitude 7 a Large Fire and Magnitude 10 it will put out an Inferno.   Smother has no effect on magical fire or on fire-based creatures.  ▶   Spell Resistance  This spell matches its Magnitude against the Mag- nitude of any incoming spell. If Spell Resistance’s Mag- nitude is greater than the incoming spell’s, then the in- coming spell has no effect. If the incoming spell’s Mag- nitude is equal to or greater than the Magnitude of Spell Resistance, then the spell affects the target normally. Unlike many protective spells, Spell Resistance re- mains in place for the entirety of its Duration – spells that successfully breach the spell do not dispel it. How- ever, it does not discriminate between incoming spells – a comrade attempting to magically heal the recipient of Spell Resistance must overcome it in order to success- fully use a healing spell.  ▶   Spirit Resistance  This spell matches its Magnitude against the POW of any spirit that comes into contact with the recipient. If the recipient of the spell’s combined POW + Spirit Resistance’s Magnitude is greater than the spirit’s POW, the spirit cannot touch the recipient. A spirit unable to touch a recipient will not be able to personally attack or harm them, including through ranged attacks.   A spell cast by a spirit at the recipi- ent is blocked unless its Magnitude exceeds the Spirit Resistances’s Magnitude.  ▶   Summon (Other World Creature)  Resist (Persistence) This spell allows the caster to summon one Other World creature, per casting, to the mundane world. The creature is not automatically under the caster’s control. If the summoned creature succeeds its Persistence test, it is free of the caster’s command and if so inclined may be hostile to the caster. Otherwise it acts as if under the influence of a Dominate spell, for the Duration of the spell. The Duration of the summon spell also determines how long the creature is trapped in the mundane world. Examples of of spell variations: Demons, Elementals, Spirits and Undead.  ▶   Tap (Characteristic)  Concentration, Resist (Persistence), Touch There are actually seven Tap spells, one for each Characteristic. These devastating spells allow the caster to permanently strip a target of Characteristic points, transforming them into Power Points for his own use. The caster must make contact with the target, either physically or through Touch Projection, in order to Tap it – therefore the spell cannot be used on incorporeal creatures, such as spirits. Tap will only work if its Magnitude is equal to, or greater than the target’s specified Characteristic. Thus a Magnitude 6 Tap Strength spell would only work on targets with a STR of 6 or lower. The number of points Tapped by the spell are equal to 1D6 per Combat Round the Spell is applied to the Victim. Characteristic points lost to Tap are lost permanently, though the victim can raise them again through nor- mal means of increasing a Characteristic.   Character- istics may be Tapped to 0, which usually involves the death of the victim. The exception being Charisma. For each Characteristic point the caster Taps, he will gain one Power Point. The caster is limited in the num- ber of Power Points he can gain through Tap; the spell can only increase his Power Points to double his normal limit.   An Arcane Magic user may simply Tap a target and dissipate any gained Power Points. If the caster gains more Power Points through Tap than his normal maximum, they will disappear at the rate of one Power Point per minute once the spell fin- ishes.  59 Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 62 ===

▶   Teleport  Instant, Resist (Dodge) Teleport allows an Arcane Magic user to instanta- neously move themselves, or a target, to anywhere within the range of the spell, as long as the destination can be directly observed (Sense Projection spells allow the Caster to ‘see’ locations beyond physical line of sight), there is solid footing and no object bars their arrival. If these conditions are not met, the spell automatically fails. The caster is able to teleport objects up to 3 points of SIZ per point of Magnitude.  ▶   Time Travel (Time Period)  Instant This spell transports the caster and a number of crea- tures (of SIZ 12-18) equal to the Magnitude of the spell to a named Time era via a Time Tunnel that opens up and instantly sucks them through to their destina- tion. The Duration of the spell is the time that the caster and group jumps forward or backwards through time. Casters usually have some knowledge about the time period they are travelling to, and use an Anchor, a land- mark such as a bronze statue, that exists in both the original and destination time period.   If they are trav- elling blind without such an Anchor, the casting roll is with a Penalty die (-1P) and the effects of a fumbled roll are even more catastrophic than the examples below suggest. If the spell casting fails, the caster and group still travel, but they end up in the wrong location (1D10 Km away from the Anchor point) and time (1D10 time units away, the length of the time unit depends on Duration, e.g. if the duration was in days, the time unit is days). If the spell casting is fumbled catastrophic events oc- cur. Here are some example events; the creative Game- master is encouraged to create more:  A Guardian creature from an Other World emerges from the portal and attacks the caster, in an at- tempt to close the portal.  The caster, and all within 10m of them, is sucked through the portal which then promptly closes. The caster is so befuddled that he cannot remem- ber the spell for D20+D4 hours.  As above, but the caster and party arrive in a com- pletely different Time Era or even an Alternative Reality. Arcane Magic users with this spell can change time freely without having to worry about unintentional but- terfly effect changes, or any alterations in their own ex- istence or memory from changing their past.   However, too regular use is likely to lead to the catastrophic effects of a fumble.  ▶   Treat Wounds  Instant, Touch This spell must be cast upon a wounded character. It dramatically accelerates the natural healing rate of the target.   For every point of Magnitude of this spell, the caster can repair one hit point per Combat Round, for the Duration of the spell. Treat Wounds cannot reattach or regrow a severed limb and will not work on any Major Wound effects.  8.4 Creating Magic Items  Most Arcane Magic Items found in play in a game of Fantasy Crux will have been created by the characters or Non Player Character magicians. Although the spells that their characters use to cre- ate Arcane Magic Items are detailed in their respective spell lists, its worth going through them briefly to re- mind yourself what spell does what and how it is used.  Make Scrolls   This spell allows for the creation of mag- ical writings. Scrolls can be used to transfer knowledge (spells) or directly to cast the written spell.  Make Spell Matrix   Arcane Magic users can create items and store spells using this spell. Spells stored can then be used and manipulated using the wielder’s Power Points. Arcane Magic users also find very useful the Magic spell Create Power Point Store so that they can have a greater pool for manipulations.  8.4.1   ⋆   Identify a Magic Item  There is no catch all “Detect Magical Properties” or “Know Magic item” skill in Fantasy Crux. This is quite deliberate, keeping with the general policy that such items are not the equivalent of Magical shotguns.   Some options are: Consult a Sage or other magical expert. This option will cost the characters lots of money.   Take a baseline of one hundred silvers per point of spell magnitude or some perilous quest that the character must do in re- turn. Such experts are rare, because most high ranking Magicians have little time for magical research for oth- ers, and would be more interested in their own schemes. Detect Magic spells. This merely tells you the item is magical.   A critical casting may tell the caster how powerful the item is. Trial and error.   The character tries to find out the item’s use by experiment. Allow creative and imagina- tive plans to reveal partially what the item does. Researching the myths and legends around the item. This is the most certain way of finding out what a magic item does. Of course such myths may be obscure them- selves, requiring a dangerous adventure to a long hidden repository of knowledge to find.  60   Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 63 ===

CHAPTER 9  Divine Magic  This type of magic is gained through the worship of a god or goddess. Divine Magic spells come directly from the Deity and given to the character to use on their Deity’s behalf. The first step in learning Divine Magic is to join a re- ligion that worships the Deity whose magic the character wants to learn.  9.1 Religions  Religions range in size from a handful of worshippers, meeting in secret to honour a dead hero of the revolu- tion, to the millions of devotees of a world spanning sun god. There are temples where worshippers can learn Di- vine Magic directly from their Deity. They have rules and expectations of their worshippers and anyone found wanting is expelled from the comfort and support of the religion.  9.1.1   ⋆   Religion Template  Each religion is described using the following Religion format.  Name of God or Religion Short description:   This short description briefly cov- ers the religion’s mythology and its current place in the world.  Type of Religion:   This is the type and size of religion. Great Deities are worshipped by millions and are at least acknowledged across the entire world.   Major Deities are important in a specific region and have hundreds of thousands of worshipers.   Minor Deities are usually the minor members of a religious pantheon appealing to a small group of specialist worshipers. Hero Religions worship dead heroes whose deeds and magic powers live on after their death.  Worshippers:   The type of people who typically make up the religion membership.  Worshipper Duties:   This is what the god and religion expect of its members. Break these rules and expect expulsion. On the other hand, follow these rules and promote them to others and the character will advance in the religion’s hierarchy.  Religion skills:   These are skills favoured by the reli- gion’s patron Deity and taught to its worshippers by its Priests.  Religion spells:   Divine Magic that the god teaches.  Special benefits:   Any bonuses to skill use or other spe- cial abilities or advantages that a worshipper gains by being a member of the religion. Several examples can be seen in section 9.1.5.  9.1.2   ⋆   Worshipper Duties  Each religion has a set of Worshipper Duties which rep- resent the religion’s objectives in the world. When a character does an action that fulfils one of the Worshipper Duties they gain one Improvement Point for a minor act and up to three points for a major act. When a character does an action that goes against one of the Worshipper Duties they lose between one and three Improvement Points, depending on the grievous- ness of their transgression. If they have no Improvement Points left, then they start to lose Divine Magic spells learnt from the religion as a penance, on a one to one ba- sis. The player may choose which spell to lose, but they must be ones that they have learnt from the religion. Example  Gerik the Pious acts in away that brings his god into disrepute and loses an Improvement Point.   He has no Improvement Points to lose, since he has previ- ously spent them on religion improvements, so he loses Shield 3 which he had previously learnt from the reli- gion, which now becomes Shield 2.  If the offending character has no Improvement Points or spells to lose, then they are excommunicated from the religion and may never join it again.  9.1.3   ⋆   Religion Ranks  There are four ranks of membership: Lay members, Ini- tiates, Priests and Holy Warriors.  ▶   Lay members  Lay members are normal worshippers of the religion. They regularly attend the temple on holy days and do their best to uphold the strictures of the religion. In re- turn, the religion protects them as best it can, and its Priests and Initiates cast Divine Magic on their behalf. Lay members cannot learn Divine Magic.   To become a lay member of a religion a character must have Lore (Religion) of at least 20%.  61 Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 64 ===

▶   Initiates  Initiates are worshippers who have dedicated their lives to the tenents of the religion.   They always attend the temple on holy days and always uphold the strictures of the religion.   In return, the religion will pay ran- soms if they are captured and teach the Initiate Divine Magic. Initiates can learn up to 2 Magnitude of any Di- vine Magic spell available to the religion. To become an Initiate a member of a religion needs a Lore (Religion) of at least 40% and must spend two Improvement Points.  ▶   Priests  Priests are the living embodiment of their faith, instructed by their Deity to be its living representative in the mor- tal world.   They lead the services for their temple on holy days.   In return, the religion will pay ransoms if they are captured and teach them the inner secrets of their religion (this means all available Divine Magic at unlimited Magnitude). To become a Priest a character must have a Lore (Religion) and two of the cult skills at least 75%, there must be a vacancy in the temple hier- archy, or the Priest be willing to become a missionary and establish a new temple. In addition the Player must pay five Improvement Points. Upon becoming a Priest the character gains an Allied Spirit. This is a spirit associated with the Deity who is willing to work with one of their mortal worshipers to further the aims of the religion.   The Allied Spirit is usually bound in either an animal or an item, sacred to the religion. If this item or animal is destroyed then the Allied Spirit returns to its home plane of existence.   A Priest must go on a quest of repentance, which directly benefits his religion to gain a new Allied Spirit, since the Gods look dimly on Priests who lose their Allied Spirits. An Allied Spirit starts with an INT of 2D6+6 and a POW of 3D6 and knows 3 points of Divine Magic known to the Religion.   The spirit can see immaterial and in- visible spirits, alerting its master to their presence in a twenty meter range.   An Allied Spirit is in permanent Mind Link with its master, with a range equal to its POW x5 in meters. An Allied Spirit has whatever physical characteristics that its host animal or item has.   Allied Spirits can be improved like player characters, by spending Improve- ment Points from their master’s total.  ▶   Holy Warriors  These are Holy Warriors who protect the temples and worshipers of their Deity.   Not all Religions have Holy Warriors, especially those dedicated to peace, but where they do, these warriors ceaselessly crusade to protect the faithful and punish the Religion’s enemies. Like Priests they are expected to uphold the Worshipper duties un- failingly.   Also, as the religion’s warriors, they are ex- pected to take up arms against any aggressor who at- tacks its worshippers or the religion’s Temples. These warriors are incredibly useful to the cult they belong to, which will always pay any ransom or make a rescue attempt when a Holy Warrior is captured.   In addition they teach them any Divine Magic known to the religion. The minimum requirement to become a Holy Warrior is to have Lore (Religion) of at least 50% and a Weapon Skill of 75% in the Religion’s holy weapon, usually the weapon that is most associated with the Deity that the Religion worships. In addition the Player must pay five Improvement Points. When someone becomes a Holy Warrior they are gifted a specially consecrated weapon, that gives them a bonus when fighting to defend fellow worshippers, reli- gion temples, and when attacking enemies of their faith. This bonus is usually a Bonus die (+1B) to the appro- priate weapon skill and double damage when fighting for their Religion. All damage done by such weapons is considered magical. They also gain armour, which is magically blessed by the Religion’s Deity. Normally, this is at least double the normal AP of the armour type used, and it may have additional powers depending on the Deity.  9.1.4   ⋆   Player Character Priests  Priests and Holy Warriors don’t just hang around their Temples doing their duties. They have plenty of Initiates and lay worshippers to do the more mundane adminis- trative tasks, such as collecting tithes and feeding the poor. As player characters, their lives are more interest- ing and the source of constant adventuring on behalf of their religion.   Some of the quests that they might get involved in are as follows:  Going out and converting the unbelievers (or those who believe in the wrong Deity).  Actively fighting the enemies of the religion.  Recovering long-lost symbols and powerful arte- facts of the faith.  62   Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 65 ===

Attending a cross-faith to deal with all the poli- tics and misunderstanding to come to a consensus about what to do about a common enemy.  Rushing to the aid of an embattled and besieged town of his faithful believers beset by enemies or some other form of spiritual peril.  Visiting the hinterlands to provide spiritual guid- ance and duties to those in need  Traveling to a distant Holy Mountain to commune directly with their Deity or otherwise performing idealistic inspirational acts, or to prove their worth.  Going on special mission, where success depends on Divine Magic.  Traveling as a special envoy of the Religion to show due deference to the King / Priest / High Emperor.  9.1.5   ⋆   Deity Examples  The following Religions are intended as examples or tem- plates for your own creations or as simple pick up and play religions, that can be elaborated and detailed as a campaign progresses.  ▶   The Night Mistress  When the Sun Lord sleeps, the mistress of the Night stealthily creeps up from the Underworld to play.   Whether her games are harmful or beneficial depends on the per- son’s view of the dark.  Type of Religion:   Great  Worshippers:   Monsters of the Underdark, Thieves, Out- casts from society.  Worshipper Duties:   Banish the light!   Preserve the sanctity of Dark regions, prevent the forces of light invading the underworld. Remain mysterious and un- fathomable.  Religion skills:   Deception, Ranged Combat, Unarmed Combat  Folk Magic:   Darkwall, Enhance Deception, Extinguish.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Call Shade, Fear.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) to Deception dur- ing the Night.  ▶   The Sun King  The bright blazing ruler of the day.   The everlasting source of life and light.   To some cultures he is the ul- timate lawmaker, whose word is to be obeyed without question. Also a source of healing and resurrection.  Type of Religion:   Great  Worshippers:   Emperors, Charismatic Leaders  Worshipper Duties:   Banish the dark, Guide the masses.  Religion skills:   Healing, Close Combat, Ranged Com- bat, Influence.  Folk Magic:   Enhance Influence, Fire Missile?, Fire Weapon?, Heal, Light, Multi Missile.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Call Salamander, Divine Heal, Resurrect, Sun Spear, Sun Disc, Radiant Appearance.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) to Influence skills when dealing with lower social classes.  ▶   The Sky Lord  Arrogant and aloof, the Sky Lord brings storm and rain at the behest of his elder ruling brother the Sun King. He strains at the unreasonable laws that bind him to his brother’s authority and is a constant rebel. In some lands he has cast off his brother’s chains and is acknowl- edged as the King of the Gods.  Type of Religion:   Great  Worshippers:   Barbarians  Worshipper Duties:   Ride the storm!, Fight against Tyrants, Stay free.  Religion skills:   Close Combat, Natural Lore.  Folk Magic:   Fanaticism, Extinguish, Vigour, Weapon Enhance.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Berserk, Call Sylph, Lightning Strike, Whirlwind, Enhance Machismo.  Special benefits:   Suffers no penalty when doing skill tests in rainy or windy conditions.  ▶   The Earth Mother  The all embracing and loving Earth Mother is known throughout the world.   Some people believe that she is the world itself. She is the source of all nature’s bounty, which clothes and feeds mankind, but also has a savage side that expresses itself in hurricanes, tidal waves and other natural disasters.  Type of Religion:   Great  Worshippers:   The religion is made up of people and creatures who live off the land. In civilised areas these are the peasants who farm the land and the woodsmen who hunt and gather in the forests. In the wilderness the Elves, Satyrs and Fey worship her.   She is found wherever creatures have an acknowledged connection with nature.  Worshipper Duties:   Respect the Earth. Don’t foul or pollute the environment. Practice the peaceful cut, a small prayer said in thanks to the animal spirit before killing it for food. The prayer ensures its return to the Earth Mother and through the cycle of rebirth into the world.  63 Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 66 ===

Religion skills:   Healing, Nature Lore, Resilience.  Folk Magic:   Heal, Protection  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Absorption, Berserk, Divine Heal.  Special benefits:   Any member of this cult gains a Bonus die (+1B) to their Nature Lore, due to their connec- tion to Nature, which they gain through their rela- tionship with the Earth Mother.  ▶   The Death Goddess  Banished to the Underworld by the Sun King for a heinous crime, the Sun King’s sister is a twisted force that rails against the authority of her brother.   Unable to leave the Underworld, she and her agents take that which is most precious to her brother, the very souls of his sub- jects, the living. She does this upon their physical death. Those judged unworthy by the Sun King, denied bliss in Eternal Golden Heaven, are taken by her cold embrace, into the Underworld.  Type of Religion:   Great  Worshippers:   The morbidly insane, Mercenaries, Grave- yard attendants, Assassins.  Worshipper Duties:   Respect the dead, Put down the Undead.  Religion skills:   Close Combat, Undead Lore.  Folk Magic:   Demoralise, Spirit shield, Weapon Enhance.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Call (Undead), Death March, Resurrect, Touch of Death.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) when inspecting corpse to determine time and cause of death.  ▶   The Lord of Knowledge  He is the Great Sage of Heaven, who exists only to drink in all the facts and information about the world.   His book-loving followers emulate him, making a living by running Knowledge markets and selling advice and in- formation.  Type of Religion:   Major  Worshippers:   Explorers, Librarians, Scholars, Detec- tives.  Worshipper Duties:   Find out new knowledge, cata- logue and record information, maintain public libraries, punish knowledge thieves, remain unbiased and im- partial.  Religion skills:   Lores of various types, Influence, Lan- guages.  Folk Magic:   Detect X, Mindspeech.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Find X of various types, Soul Sight, See Past.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) when using a Li- brary to find information.  ▶   The Trickster  Culture hero or culture villain?   This Deity aims to amuse him/herself by playing pranks on those who, in its opinion, deserve to be shamed before their peers. In some cultures the Trickster is revered as a Sacred Clown, who mocks authority when it is high-and-mighty and not working in the interest of the people. In others, he is out- law, defying the Divine Right of the rulers to oppress the people.  Type of Religion:   Major  Worshippers:   Thieves, Village idiots, non-conformists.  Worshipper Duties:   Play pranks on the pompous and foolish.  Religion skills:   Deception, Ranged Combat.  Folk Magic:   Befuddle, Hinder.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Illusion, Reflection, Purity, Wax Effigy, Puppet, Jigsaw.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) Deception when play- ing pranks.  ▶   The Merchant  He is a constant traveller, who gains joy by communicat- ing with the new friends that he meets along the way. Long ago he learnt the art of commerce, as a way of making his contacts happy and a way of learning about the workings of the cultures he encounters. His follow- ers know that a mule, a bag of shiny things, and a warm accepting smile, is all that is needed to open up a world of opportunity and reward.  64   Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 67 ===

Type of Religion:   Major  Worshippers:   Merchants, Heralds, Traders, Shopkeep- ers.  Worshipper Duties:   Spread the word to new places, Enrich both yourself and your temple.  Religion skills:   Influence, Perception, Ride, Drive, Lan- guages.  Folk Magic:   Clear the Path, Enhance Influence, En- hance Perception.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Treasury, Ward Camp, Create Crystal Ship.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) when using Percep- tion or Influence as part of a financial deal.  ▶   The Hearth Goddess  This down to earth Deity is a daughter of the Earth Goddess who chose to live in the urban centres of mor- tals. She looks after the home. Her name is invoked to maintain domestic harmony and fertility.  Type of Religion:   Minor  Worshippers:   House keepers and owners.  Worshipper Duties:   Keep a clean and orderly home.  Religion skills:   Craft, Influence.  Folk Magic:   Heal, Enhance Craft.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Block Fertility, En- hance Fertility, Repair and Replace.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) to any skill test in the character’s home.  ▶   The Lord of War  He is a blood-soaked Deity of violence and conflict. He is mentor and master to both the high-and-mighty General and the rank-and-file soldier.   In civilized cultures he is worshipped through ritual, where armies receive his blessing before battle.   Amongst the Barbarians he is invoked through deed, in the fire of the battle itself.  Type of Religion:   Great  Worshippers:   Generals, soldiers.  Worshipper Duties:   Fight hard, Fight to win, Fight!  Religion skills:   Close Combat, Dodge, Ranged Com- bat, Unarmed Combat.  Folk Magic:   Coordination, Fanaticism, Strength, Vigour, Weapon Enhancement.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Shield, Rout, True (Weapon), Unstoppable Charge, Ward Camp.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) for any test when leading others into Combat.  ▶   The Healer Goddess  The White One will heal anyone, regardless of behaviour and allegiance. Her white-robed worshippers are found not only in settlements but also in the wagon-trains of armies.   Healing gives even the most violent individual the chance to turn their life around and become a War- rior for Peace.  Type of Religion:   Major  Worshippers:   Healers, Doctors  Worshipper Duties:   Heal anyone regardless of out- look on life, maintain areas of sanctuary.  Religion skills:   Healing, Perception, Influence.  Folk Magic:   Heal  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Divine Heal, Res- urrect.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) to all Healing at- tempts.  ▶   The Sea Goddess  She is the avaricious sister of the Earth Goddess, who is either the elder or younger sibling depending who you talk to. She constantly wars with her sister for surface area on the planet. In some places her tides eat the land and swallow remote islands. In others her waters relent and give back dry land previously sunk in Ancient times. Any sailor is wise to ask her permission before travelling across her watery realm.  Type of Religion:   Great  Worshippers:   Sailors, fishermen, mermen, creatures of the sea.  Worshipper Duties:   Respect the sea, ensure the god- dess’ permission is sought by sailors.  Religion skills:   Sailing, Natural Lore  Folk Magic:   Detect Treasures of the Sea, Water Breath.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Call Undine, Breathe Water.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) to all sailing checks made at sea, and Athletics checks made to swim.  ▶   Chaos  The writhing thing that is Chaos, strains and buckles on the boundaries of creation.   Outside of the ordered universe, it howls to get in, and when it breaks through the cracks in reality it causes change and the warping of nature.  Type of Religion:   Great  Worshippers:   The insane, its foul monstrous spawn.  65 Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 68 ===

Worshipper Duties:   Erode the very fabric of reality, destroy beauty, inflict pain on the living.  Religion skills:   None.  Folk Magic:   Befuddle, Countermagic, Demoralise, Dis- ruption, Ignite.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Fear, Madness.  Special benefits:   Immune to any kind of Mind Control magic.  ▶   The Moon Hag  There is an old woman who lives on the moon.   She is the queen of the witches and all the spirits who live on the dark side of the moon.   She is an enigma who will send you mad if you offend her sensibilities.  Type of Religion:   Minor  Worshippers:   Magicians, Astronomers.  Worshipper Duties:   Observe the moon, maintain the mystery of the moon amongst non-religion members, study moon mysteries.  Religion skills:   Natural Lore.  Folk Magic:   Call Magic Spell spirit, Counter magic.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Reflection, Mind- blast, Mindlink, Madness.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) to any skill roll when dealing with Moon spirits.  ▶   The Huntress  The Divine Huntress stalks the land.   In primitive and barbaric societies she is the patron of those who go into the wilderness to bring back essential meats to the tribe. In more civilised areas, she takes on the character of the supreme risk-taker, looking for more and more fabulous and exotic prey for glory and renown.  Type of Religion:   Minor  Worshippers:   Hunters, Big Game Hunters.  Worshipper Duties:   Be true to the hunt, do not de- plete the hunting grounds, capture poachers.  Religion skills:   Deception, Ranged Combat, Nature Lore.  Folk Magic:   Multi Missile, Coordination, Clear Path, Speedart.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Sureshot, True (Bow or Spear).  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) Deception when stalk- ing prey.  9.1.6   ⋆   Learning Divine Magic  Divine Magic can be taught only to members of a reli- gion with an appropriate Lore (Religion) skill and be of Initiate, Priest or Holy Warrior status (each rank requir- ing Improvement Points).  9.1.7   ⋆   Learning Spells  A character with access to the Divine Magic discipline can learn new spells by paying a cost in Improvement Points, equal to twice the Magnitude of the spell, to the Deity. This may be done in an incremental fashion, i.e. the player buys Shield 1 for two Improvement Points and then later increases this to Shield 3, by spending an additional four points.   These points are not regained, even when the character leaves the religion.  9.1.8   ⋆   Casting Spells  A character must be able to gesture with his hands and be able to chant in order to cast a spell.   Whenever a spell is cast using Divine Magic, there will always be a sight and sound that nearby creatures can detect, be it a flash of light, a crack of thunder or a shimmering in the air.   The exact effects, are up to the Gamemaster and Player to decide but will automatically be detected by any creatures within ten times the Magnitude of the spell, in metres. Casting Divine Magic is automatically successful. No dice need be rolled, no chances of a fumble or critical either.  ▶   Power Points  Divine Magic does not cost any Power Points when it is cast.  ▶   Casting Time  Divine Magic spells always take only a single combat Action to cast and takes place on the Combat Order of the character casting the spell. Distractions or attacks on the spellcaster as he casts will either automatically ruin the spell (if the spellcaster is blinded or disarmed, or suffers a Major Wound) or require Persistence tests for them to maintain concen- tration on the spell.  ▶   Regaining Cast Divine Magic  Each Divine Magic spell may be cast only once, after which the character must return to a temple and pray or take part in a worshiping ceremony on the religion’s holy day to regain use of the spell.   Thus, normally, Divine Magic is regained during the downtime between adventures. In-game characters may regain Divine Magic by one of two ways.  Each time the character successfully performs a worshipper duty, the character regains the choice of one of their spent spells.  66   Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 69 ===

They may also call on their deity and spend a Hero Point to regain a spent spell of their choosing.  ▶   Limitations  Divine Magic spells do not stack, i.e. Shield 1 plus Shield 2 does not give the protection of a Shield 3 spell.  ▶   Dismissing Spells  A caster can dismiss any Permanent or Duration Divine Magic spell(s) he has cast as a single combat action. Ceasing to cast a Concentration spell is immediate and not a Combat Action.  ▶   Splitting Magnitude  Divine Magic allows the caster to ‘split’ a spell’s Mag- nitude into multiple spells.   For instance, if the caster knows the Absorption spell at Magnitude 3, he may choose to cast it as a single Magnitude 3 spell, or he may split it into three Magnitude 1 Absorption spells, or one Magnitude 1 and one Magnitude 2 Absorption spell. The split spells are treated as separate instances and are cast separately.  ▶   The Power of Divine Magic  When in a direct contest with other forms of magic, Di- vine Magic is considered to have double its normal Mag- nitude.  ▶   Common Divine Magic  The following spells are listed as ‘All’, since all Cults teach them: Consecrate, Create Blessed Item, Create Idol, Dis- miss Magic, Divination, Excommunicate, Exorcism, Ex- tension, Find X, Mindlink, Soul Sight, Spirit Block, Spir- itual Journey.  9.1.9   ⋆   Divine Intervention  Characters also gain the ability to call for Divine Inter- vention.   A character who is an Initiate, or higher, can call upon his Deity for Divine Intervention whenever he faces a desperate situation. He may even do so if dead or unconscious, as long as it is called for in the instant that consciousness fades or death occurs. When Divine Intervention is requested, roll 1D100. If this roll is equal to or less than the character’s POW, the call for aid is answered. However, the gods demand a heavy price for their help and the character will suffer a permanent loss of POW equal to the 1D100 roll, if they are successful. If the character’s POW is reduced to 0 by this, their soul is taken to serve the god directly, effectively killing the character permanently (though their request will still be granted). A character can only call for Divine Intervention once per month, whether he is successful or not. Divine Intervention can take many forms and the fol- lowing can be considered guidelines:  Allow the character to cast any religion spell (of that Deity) at any Magnitude.  Allow a religion spell to affect every worshipper of the god within the character’s line of sight.  Bring back to life a worshipper (who may not be the character calling for Divine Intervention). Various ‘divine’ effects are also possible depending on the nature of the character’s Deity. Examples could include creating a fog to allow the character to escape from enemies, doubling their STR to defeat a powerful enemy or causing a river to break its banks to stall an invading army. Divine Intervention cannot be used to directly harm or slay mortal creatures.   Gods will refuse to aid non- worshippers and their effects will be related to their sphere of influence.  9.1.10   ⋆   Spell Traits  The traits used by Divine Magic spells are detailed be- low.  Area (X):   The spell affects all targets within a radius specified in metres.  Concentration:   The spell’s effects will remain in place so long as the character concentrates on it.   Concen- trating on a spell is functionally identical to casting the spell, requiring the caster to continue to gesture with both arms, chant, and ignore distractions.  Duration (X):   The spell’s effects will stay in place for the number of minutes indicated.   Unless otherwise specified this will be 15 minutes.  Instant:   The spell’s effects take place instantly.   The spell itself then disappears.  67 Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 70 ===

Magnitude (X):   The strength and power of the spell.  Permanent:   The spell’s effects remain in place until they are dispelled or dismissed.  Progressive:   This indicates that the spell can be learnt and cast at greater levels of Magnitude than the min- imum.  Ranged:   Ranged spells may be cast upon targets up to a maximum distance of the character’s POW x 5 in metres.  Resist (Dodge/Persistence/Resilience):   The spell’s effects do not take effect automatically.   The target may make a Dodge, Persistence or Resilience test (as specified by the spell) in order to avoid the effect of the spell entirely. Note that Resist (Dodge) spells re- quire the target to be able to use Reactions in order to Dodge. In the case of Area spells, the Resist (Dodge) trait requires the target to dive in order to mitigate the spell’s effect.  Touch:   Touch spells require the character to actually touch his target for the spell to take effect.  Religion:   The type of religion that offers this spell to it’s worshippers.   If the religion is listed as All, the spell is a Common spell available in all religions. The religion’s description will help determine which spells should or should not be available.  9.2 Spells  ▶   Absorption  Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Touch [Religions: Earth, Night] This spell absorbs incoming spells aimed at the tar- get or his equipment, converting their magical energy into Power Points which are then available to the target. Once cast on a subject, Absorption will attempt to ab- sorb the effects of any spells cast at the target.   It will not have any effect on spells that are already affecting a character.   The effects of Absorption depend on the relative Magnitude of both itself and the incoming spell. If the Absorption’s Magnitude is equal or greater to the incoming spell then it is absorbed and Absorption re- mains; if not Absorption is eliminated and the incoming spell takes effect.   Any spell absorbed by this spell is cancelled and has no effect. A character may not accumulate more Power Points than his POW while Absorption is in effect – excess Power Points garnered through Absorption simply van- ish. Absorption is incompatible with Reflection, Shield and Spirit Block.  ▶   Berserk  Duration 15, Magnitude 2, Touch [Religions: Beasts, War] The recipient of this spell is overcome with bloodlust, causing them to disregard their own safety and loyalties but imbuing them with tremendous stamina and combat ability. The recipient will automatically succeed any Resilience test for the duration of the spell. The recipient also au- tomatically succeeds at any Fatigue tests and cannot be rendered unconscious.   The Close Combat skills of the recipient receive two Bonus dice (+2B) for the spell’s duration. However, the subject may not Parry, Dodge or cast any magic spells while under the influence of Berserk. Normally, the recipient remains in the Berserk state for the entire 15 minute duration of the spell, but Gamemas- ters may allow a Berserk character to shake off the effects with a Persistence test with two Penalty dice (-2P). At the end of the spell, the recipient immediately becomes Fatigued. Berserk may not be combined with Fanaticism and in such cases Berserk will always take precedence.  ▶   Block Fertility  Magnitude 3, Permanent [Religions: Earth] While this spell is in place, the recipient is unable to conceive.   This can be seen as a blessing or a curse depending on the view of the recipient. The spell can be dispelled by the caster whenever they want. Otherwise the effect of the spell is permanent.  ▶   Breath Water  Duration 15, Magnitude 2, Touch [Religions: Sea, Water] This spell allows an air-breathing creature to breathe water for the spell’s duration (the subject will still be able to breathe air as well). It may also be used upon a water-breathing creature to allow it to breathe air.  ▶   Call (Elemental)  Magnitude 1, Permanent, Progressive [Religions: Any with affinity to elements] This spell summons and binds to the service of the caster an elemental from another plane of existence, of a size dependant on the Magnitude of the spell: 1=Small, 2=Medium, 3=Large, 4=Huge (for more details on El- ementals see page 94).   The elemental stays under the control of the Priest until it is killed or the Call spell is dispelled. To be successfully cast the spell requires an equal volume of the same material that the elemental is made up of. For example, a Large Undine (Water elemental) requires a pool of water of at least 50 m3 before it can be summoned.  68   Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 71 ===

▶   Call (Undead)  Magnitude 1, Permanent, Progressive [Religions: Evil, Death] This spell reanimates a dead human corpse and turns it into an undead creature, of a type determined by the Magnitude of the spell: 1=Skeleton, 2=Zombie, 5=Ghoul, 8=Vampire. The undead creature stays under the con- trol of the Priest until it is killed or the Call spell is dispelled.  ▶   Consecrate  Area Special, Magnitude 1, Permanent, Progressive [Religions: All] This spell is as much a part of a temple’s foundation as is its cornerstone, but may actually be cast almost anywhere. It creates a sphere with a radius of ten me- tres per point of Magnitude.   The consecrated sphere is sacred to the caster’s god.   Consecrate by itself does nothing to keep outsiders at bay, but the caster of the spell will know immediately if a spell, spirit or someone who is not a lay member of his cult crosses the bound- aries of the Consecrate spell.  ▶   Create Blessed Items  Area Special, Magnitude 1, Permanent, Progressive [Religions: All] This spell allows the caster to create items which store Divine Magic spell(s) that are blessed by a Priest with power from the Deity. Only Priests and High Priests can create blessed items. The enchanter forgets the spell(s) he blesses the item with (i.e.   he has to relearn it with Improvement Points). The wielder of the item can cast the spell(s) the item is blessed with, but once the item’s power is discharged then it must be reconsecrated at a temple of the reli- gion. The consecration takes as many hours as the Mag- nitude of the spell. If the Magnitude of the spell is higher than two, the consecrating team must have at least one Priest. The wielder must be a member of either the re- ligion that created the blessed item or an allied religion. Blessed items become protected by the religion’s De- ity and can not be broken by normal non-magical means.  ▶   Create Idol  Magnitude 4 [Religions: All] This spell requires an image of the caster’s god worth 100 GPs to be made, while a Priest reads from the sacred texts of the Deity telling the tales and myths. This stores the god’s spells, and can be used by Priests and Initiates to regain spells and can be used by Lay Members to receive lessons, via visions, upon touching the idol. Such visions will increase the Religion skill of a Lay Member by 1D10% when they are repeatedly exposed to them.  ▶   Create Crystal Ship  Magnitude 4, Duration the length of the voyage [Religions: Merchant] From out of the air coalesces a Crystal Ship, a magi- cal vessel that sails through the air to a single destination preordained by the caster.   The caster need never have been there, but the casters’ Deity must know of it. The ship is about the size of a merchant cog (one-masted as described in table 11.2, page 84) and is fitted with no weapons. Although the ship heads steadily towards the destination, at a rate of 100 km a day, the fine maneu- vering of the ship is managed by the mental thoughts of the caster.  ▶   Death March  Magnitude 4, Duration 1 Day [Religions: Death] This spell raises the local spirits of a settlement and makes them parade up and down the main road of that settlement, for a twenty four hour period.   Most of the dead will be in the form of ghosts, but the freshly dead will rise as Zombies, and those who still have bones in the cemetery will rise as Skeletons. Both types of physical dead will attack any living beings that get in their way.  ▶   Dismiss Magic  Instant, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Ranged [Religions: All] Dismiss Magic may be cast against either a general target or a specific spell.   Dismiss Magic will eliminate a combined Magnitude of spells equal to its own Magni- tude, starting with the most powerful affecting the tar- get. If it fails to eliminate any spell (because the spell’s  69 Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 72 ===

Magnitude is too high), then its effects immediately end and no more spells will be eliminated.   A spell cannot be partially eliminated, so a target under the effects of a spell whose Magnitude is higher than that of Dis- miss Magic will not have any spells currently affecting it eliminated.   Remember that Divine Magic’s Magnitude counts as double vs non-divine magic. The caster can also target Dismiss Magic against a single specific spell.   Dismiss Magic may be fired as a Reaction, but only when another spell is cast within Dis- miss Magic’s Range that the character wishes to counter. A successful Dismiss Magic disrupts the other spell and nullifies it.  ▶   Divination  Instant, Magnitude 1, Progressive [Religions: All] For each point of Magnitude of this spell the caster can ask one question of their Deity, which they must answer to the best of their ability.   A Deity can only answer questions it knows about and that falls within its sphere of power. For example, a Mountain God will know exactly what is going on its slopes at any given time, but will be completely ignorant about the Ocean. Gods will also commonly ask for a sacrifice of an an- imal or precious object worth one Gold Piece per ques- tion asked.   Particularly cruel and bloodthirsty deities will demand blood sacrifices of sentient beings.  ▶   Divine Heal  Instant, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Touch [Religions: Earth, Fertility] This powerful spell instantly heals a number of Hit Points equal to its Magnitude times four. It also cures any natural deseases and poisons. Each casting of Divine Heal will heal one Major Wound and if necessary will reattach or regenerate damaged limbs and organs.  ▶   Enhance Fertility  Magnitude 3, Permanent [Religions: Earth, Fertility] This spell makes any one creature more fertile than normal.   If it is an animal that has multiple offspring then it doubles the number.   For 