 critical hit will do maximum damage (including the damage modifier, unless it is neg- ative) and ignore armour. When parrying a successful attack with a critical parry you can block all damage regardless of the weapon size difference. A critical hit is avoided only by a critical parry (weapon categories apply) or dodge.  4.9 Fumbles  Conversely if an attacker or defender fumbles by rolling 99 or 00, the character has been put at a severe disad- vantage. It is up to the Gamemaster to determine how, dependant on the situation. Here are some examples:  Grievously hurt self or nearby friend with weapon, roll damage and ignore armour.  Trip over and fall prone, missing one combat round.  Armour or shield strap breaks, lose armour protec- tion.  Weapon is damaged or breaks.  4.10 Damage  When a character successfully scores damage against a target it must be deducted from the target’s hit points. Every weapon has a damage rating, which is listed in its statistical entry in the relevant weapon table in the Equipment chapter.   This rating is the amount of dice rolled when the weapon successfully hits a target. The attacker’s Damage Modifier is usually added to this. All damage is taken away from Hit Points.  Last hit point.   The character falls prone and will stay conscious only with a critical Resilience test roll.  Hit points equal zero.   The character is dead.   How- ever, you can spend Hero Points to avoid death.  4.10.1   ⋆   Major Wounds  If the character takes half of their original Hit Points in one go then they suffer a major wound.   This repre- sents badly mangled limbs, shattered bones and severely damaged internal organs. At the GMs discression, you may also roll on the Major Wound Table below to see what type of permanent impairment the character has suffered. They must immediately make a Resilience roll, with two Penalty dice (-2P), or fall unconscious.   If the test is successfull then the character’s DEX is immediately halved and the character may only fight on for as many combat rounds as their remaining hit points before falling unconscious. This is in addition to any effects described in the Major Wound Table, if used. The effects of major wounds are permanent, unless healed using Powers. The halved DEX is regained once the character starts to heal, since it represents the shock and trauma of the wound.  30   Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 33 ===

Roll D10   Major Wound  1   Lose an eye, all Perception rolls suffer two Penalty dice (-2P), lose 4 points of DEX, 1 point of CHA permanently. 2   Cracked skull, brain damage. Lose 4 points of INT. All skills involving mental processes suffer   a   Penalty   die   (-1P)   permanently. This includes Perception, Persistence, and all Lore, Culture, and Craft skills. 3   Right Leg muscles badly cut/mangled or leg bone shattered and becomes useless. Fall prone, can only crawl at 1m per round. Lose 2 points of DEX and 2 points of STR permanently. 4   Left Leg muscles badly cut/mangled or leg bone shattered and becomes useless.   Fall prone, can crawl at 1m per round. Lose 2 points of DEX and 2 points of STR per- manently. 5   Broken ribs, all skills suffer two Penalty dice (-2P), due to severe pain. Lose 2 points of DEX permanently. 6   Slashed stomach. Lose one extra hit point per round from blood loss.   Lose 3 points of CON permanently. 7   Heart stops in shock!   Lose consciousness for the next D10 combat rounds, falls prone and can not move. Lose 2 points of CON permanently. 8   Spine broken.   The character permanently paralysed below the neck (odd result on dice) or the torso (even result on dice). Half DEX permanently. 9   Left Arm badly broken and becomes useless permanently. Automatically drop any held items. 10   Right Arm badly broken and becomes use- less permanently.   Automatically drop any held items.  Table 4.5: Major Wounds  4.10.2   ⋆   Fatal Wounds  A fatal wound occurs if a character takes damage equal to, or in excess of, their original hit points in one go. This represents hacked off limbs, blows that shatter rib cages, decapitation, blows that stab the heart or other vital organs directly. The character is immediately dead.  4.11 Special Combat Rules  4.11.1   ⋆   Mounted Combat  A mounted warrior has a Bonus die (+1B) to his at- tacks and parries against adjacent opponents on foot; a character on foot defending against a mounted attacker suffers a Penalty die (-1P) to his Reaction skill. These modifiers do not apply if the target on foot is as tall (or has a weapon 2 sizes bigger) as the mounted character is. In addition:  A mounted character uses his mount’s Movement Rate when moving rather than his own.  A mounted character charging with a Lance uses his mount’s Damage Modifier rather than his own.  A mounted adventurer can use no weapon at a skill level greater than his Riding skill score.  ▶   Untrained Mounts  The rider of a mount unused to combat must make a Riding Skill test at the start of each Combat Round. On success the horse is treated as a trained mount for the remainder of the Combat Round.   On failure the horse flees combat (use the Sprint action) at every opportunity for the remainder of the Combat Round.  4.11.2   ⋆   Second Weapon or Shield  A character wielding two weapons or a weapon and a shield may use the off-hand item to either:  Gain an additional Parry or Opportunity attack per Combat Round (over and above the normal Reaction allowance)  Gain a single bonus Close Combat Attack action. This bonus attack is at a Penalty die (-1P) to Close Combat Skill and may only be a normal Close Combat Attack, not a special attack like All Out Attack, Disarming Attack, Great Attack, etc.  4.11.3   ⋆   Combat Skills above 100%  When two combatants have skills above 100% battle may start to become repetitive, i.e. attacks will succeed but dodges/parries will also succeed thus a lot of time may be wasted in back and forth rolling until someone rolls a critical or a fumble. Instead, an opposed skill check may be rolled to de- termine the winner of the contest immediately.   See page 12 for more on opposed skill tests of over 100%.  31 Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 34 ===

Action   Description  Charge   Character moves twice movement, followed by a close combat attack with a +1D6 to damage. Loses Reaction for the round. If charging uphill do not apply the extra damage. Close Combat Attack   Character attacks opponent with weapon, tests vs.   Close Combat skill.   If successful does weapon damage plus damage modifier. All Out Attack   Two attacks at a Penalty die (-1P). Gives up Reaction for round. Great Attack   One attack at a Bonus die (+1B) with maximum damage modifier.   Gives up Reaction for round. Disarming Attack   Attack at a Penalty die (-1P) to disarm opponent. Weapon or shield is thrown 1D6 meters away. Trip Attack   Attack at a Penalty die (-1P) to trip opponent. Opponent falls prone. Knockout Attack   Attack at a Penalty die (-1P) to knock out opponent.   If the damage is equal to a major wound the target is knocked out. Otherwise minimum weapon damage. Knock-Back Attack   Attack with shield (at a Penalty die (-1P) if in off-hand). If opponent fails to parry or dodge he is pushed back 2 meters and needs an Athletics roll at a Penalty die (-1P) or fall prone. Set Weapon   As an action the character sets a spear or polearm in anticipation of a charge. When it occurs the character attacks first with a Bonus die (+1B) to weapon skill. Standard Move   The character moves their Movement Rate in metres as a free action, once per round. Change Stance   May move from prone to standing and vice versa. Fighting Retreat   Moves their Movement Rate and defends at a Bonus die (+1B) (+2B if using a Medium or Large Shield). Sprint   Moves twice Movement Rate. May not attack and may only Dodge as a reaction. Ranged Combat Attack   Character attacks opponent with weapon, tests vs.   Ranged Combat skill if successful then does weapon damage (plus damage modifier, except for crossbows). Ranged Combat Aim   Character aims for a combat round to gain a Bonus die (+1B) to the next ranged attack. Use Supernatural Power   Character uses a supernatural Power. Cost and effect depends on the Discipline. Delay   Character either waits until after another character’s action or tries to interrupt it. Intimidate/Persuade   The character uses their Influence skill vs the enemies’ Persistence to either intimidate, or persuade foes who are facing defeat, to flee or surrender. Ready Weapon   Character draws or loads weapon making it ready for combat. It takes half his movement to ready a single weapon. Skill Use   Character uses a non combat skill. Unarmed Attack   The character can either attack using a natural weapon, such as a fist or claw, or grapple.  Table 4.6: Summary of Combat Actions  32   Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 35 ===

PartII Disciplines and Powers

=== PAGE 36 ===

CHAPTER 5  Disciplines  5.1 Introduction  Disciplines provide a wide variety of different extraordi- nary and/or supernatural options to embelish your cam- paigns. You can pick and choose what disciplines make more sense to your campaign or you can even come up with your own. Common in all disciplines is their dependence on cer- tain characteristics.   Most use POW and spend Power Points one way or another.  5.2 Power  5.2.1   ⋆   Regaining Power Points  Using Power Points is a draining and exhausting activity that requires a major effort from which the body needs to recover. Power Points regenerate once the character fully rests, either by sitting down and taking it very easy or by having a good nights sleep. For every two hour period that a character rests they regain Power Points equal to a quarter of their POW total. Example  Rurik, with a POW of 8, takes two hours of rest to regain two Power Points, four hours to regain four Power Points, six hours to regain six Power Points and eight hours to regain the full eight Power Points.  Basically, if the character has a comfortable unin- terrupted sleep of eight hours they will regain their full power points. Characters may never exceed their origi- nal Power Point total by resting.  5.2.2   ⋆   Zero Power Points  A character who is reduced to zero Power Points falls unconscious until he has regained one Power Point.  5.2.3   ⋆   Beyond Maximum  There are ways of surpassing the maximum number of Power Points available to characters by using some of the supernatural powers described in the disciplines found in  the following chapters. For example, practitioners of the Folk Magic discipline can have access to additional pools of Power Points, via bound Magic Spirits (see Call Spirit spell) and magic items that act as Power Point Stores (see Create Power Point Store spell).   However, these pools regenerate, if at all, independently of the charac- ter’s natural rate. Experienced Folk Magic users could potentially have several Power Point stores and bound Magic Spirits at their disposal, which allows them to cast many of their spells without using their own pre- cious pool of Power Points.  34   Chapter 5.   Disciplines

=== PAGE 37 ===

CHAPTER 6  Battle  The Battle Discipline represents years of advanced traning in combat techniques.   It enables warriors to reach an understanding of the flow of battle to such a degree that he can gain advantages over their oppo- nents. Some times that is forcing an opponent to leave an opening or positioning themselves in such a way to avoid harm. Other times it enables unprecedented focus and calmness in the midst of battle enabling precise and calculated blows.  6.1 Spot Rules  6.1.1   ⋆   Learning Battle  Characters learn Battle from other characters who know the practice. They need to have at least 51% to a combat skill and spend two Improvement Points to get access to the Battle discipline. Each technique is learnt separately.  6.1.2   ⋆   Learning Techniques  Characters learn Battle Techniques from other charac- ters who know the appropriate techniques.   Learning techniques costs one Improvement Point per Magnitude point. The maximum number of Battle Techniques a char- acter can learn is INT/2. Battle Techniques can be learnt from a number of sources.   The most typical is from military academies but it can also be from the lone retired veteran. In each case the player character must be in good standing with the teacher before they will teach them a technique.   If the teacher is indifferent to the player character to start with then they will first need to un- dertake some kind of service, which can be the focus of an adventure. Optional: Self-taught With enough perseverance a character can practice and learn new Battle Techniques by themselves but that will cost them double the Improvement Points normally required.  6.1.3   ⋆   Using Techniques  A character can use a technique freely as part of a com- bat action or reaction.   Only a single Battle Technique can be used per combat round.   Any Battle Technique needs to be declared before the appropriate dice is rolled. Applying a Battle Technique is always successful but you have to spend a number of Power Points equal to the Magnitude of the technique.  6.1.4   ⋆   Techniques Traits  Unless otherwise stated all Techniques have the following traits.  Are instant and apply only for the action or reac- tion that are rolled for.  Can not be used in combination with special at- tacks like Great Attack, Disarming Attack, Aim, etc.  Are Non-Variable; they can only be used at the specified Magnitude.  6.2 Techniques  The battle techniques can improve various aspects of combat.   Some are improved versions of existing ma- noeuvres, like Improved Disarm, while other are new, like Defensive Stance.   These manoeuvres make more sense to acquire for combat experts since they will al- ready have a high skill (which is harder to increase).  35 Chapter 6.   Battle

=== PAGE 38 ===

Technique   Magnitude   Effect  Awareness   3   When the warrior is aware of an opponent the latter cannot gain a flanking bonus for three combat rounds. Combat Focus   2   Allows a warrior to make a close combat attack with a Bonus die (+1B). Combat Mastery   3   Allows a warrior to make a close combat attack with a Bonus die (+1B) and +2 damage.   If Combat Focus is already known it can be substituted with this technique with one Improvement Point. Confuse   2   Can only be used for an attack action and forces the opponent’s parry or dodge to be at a Penalty die (-1P). Deadly Aim   3   Allows a warrior to make a ranged attack with a Bonus die (+1B) and +2 damage. If Impr. Aim is already known it can be substituted with this technique with one IP. Defensive Stance   4   When the warrior is wielding a shield their effective Armour Points is increased by two for four combat rounds. Extra Reaction   3   The warrior gains an extra reaction in this round with a Penalty die (-1P). Impr. Combat Order   2   Allows a warrior to react faster (needs to declare before Combat Order rolls). It provides +4 to Combat Order. Impr. Aim   2   The attack is similar to the Aim special attack but is immediate. Impr. All Out Attack   4   The attack is similar to the All Out special attack but without losing the reaction. Impr. Disarm   2   The attack is similar to the Disarm special attack but without the penalty. Impr. Trip   2   The attack is similar to the Trip special attack but without the penalty. Impr. Great Attack   4   Allows a warrior to make a Great Attack without losing their reaction. Impr. Intimidate   2   The warrior’s intimidate (Influence) gains a Bonus die (+1B). Impr. Knock-Back   2   The attack is similar to the Knock-Back special attack but without the penalty. Impr. Knockout   2   The attack is similar to the Knockout special attack but without the penalty. Protect   3   If you and an ally are within 3m of the same enemy you may intervene and force the enemy to attack you instead. This counts as a free action. Twin Attack   2   The attack is similar to the All Out special attack but with no penalty for the first attack. Twin Missile   4   Allows a warrior to make an additional single ranged attack action at Penalty die (-1P) in quick succession. Unarmed Fast Attack   2   When unarmed a warrior can make an additional unarmed attack at Penalty die (-1P) in quick succession. Unarmed Focus   2   Allows a warrior to make an unarmed attack with a Bonus die (+1B). Unarmed Mastery   3   Allows a warrior to make an unarmed attack with a Bonus die (+1B) and +2 damage.   If Unarmed Focus is already known it can be substituted with this technique with one Improvement Point.  Table 6.1: Battle Techniques  36   Chapter 6.   Battle

=== PAGE 39 ===

CHAPTER 7  Folk Magic  This discipline represents common magic or hedge magic.   It is the typical type of magic that most cam- paigns will have. Magic is generally of a practical nature, meant to address battle or the common ills of the com- munity: healing the sick, bringing love or luck, driving away evil forces, finding lost items, reading omens and so on.  7.1 Spot Rules  7.1.1   ⋆   Learning Folk Magic  Folk Magic Casting is treated as a skill. The base chance for Folk Magic Casting is POWx3. Spells are learnt sep- arately, but the Folk Magic Casting skill determines the success for casting all Folk Magic spells.   Characters learn Folk Magic from other characters who know the practice. It costs four Improvement Points to get access to the Magic discipline.  7.1.2   ⋆   Learning Spells  Characters learn Folk Magic spells from other characters who know the appropriate spells. Learning spells costs one Improvement Point per Magnitude point. If a char- acter knows a spell at a lower Magnitude, they only have to pay the difference in Improvement Points to gain the spell at a higher Magnitude. Example  Adjin already knows Coordination at 2 Magnitude. He wants to learn Coordination 3, so he must only spend one Improvement Point to gain the spell at that Mag- nitude.  Folk Magic can be learnt from a number of sources. The most typical is from some kind of school of magic appropriate for the campaign or from remote hermits and otherworldly Shamans who commune with the Spirit World and learn it’s secrets.   In some cases, it can be learnt from local priests who teach Folk Magic associated with their god’s mythological exploits. In each case the player character must be in good standing with the teacher before they will teach them the spell. If the teacher is indifferent to the player character to start with then they will first need to undertake some kind of service, which can be the focus of an adventure.  7.1.3   ⋆   Limits to Folk Magic  A character has a limit of their INTx2 in magnitude in spells.   So a character with an INT of 10 can learn 20 worth of Magnitude spells. In addition, some Folk Magic spells are variable, which means that they can have a magnitude of anywhere from one to a maximum value of six.  7.1.4   ⋆   Casting Spells  A character must be able to move his hands to make gestures, be able to chant and be able to see his target in order to cast a spell. When the character is casting a spell under duress, such as in the midst of combat, they must pass a Folk Magic Casting test to successfully cast the spell. In this regard Folk Magic is like any other skill. If the character is relaxed and has all the time in the world then no casting test is needed, the spell is automatically cast. The result of the Folk Magic casting test depends on its success:  Success:   A number of Power Points are deducted from the spellcaster’s total, equal to the Magnitude of the spell. The spell then takes effect.  Failure:   The spell does not take effect and the character loses one Power Point.  37 Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 40 ===

Critical:   The caster has been able to control the flow of the magic particularly effectively. The character loses one Power Point instead of the normal cost of the spell or Gamemaster discretion.  Fumble:   The caster has been unable to control the flow of the Folk Magic. Rather than losing a single Power Point for failing to cast the spell, the caster loses a number of Power Points equal to its Magnitude or Gamemaster discretion.  ▶   Casting Time  No other action may be taken whilst casting a spell, though the character may slowly walk up to half their Movement while spell casting. Casting begins at the start of the combat round and a spell’s effect happens on the caster’s Combat Order. Distractions, or attacks on the caster as he casts, will automatically ruin the spell, unless the caster suc- cessfully passes a Persistence test, thereby maintaining concentration on the spell. Examples of distraction in- clude blinding, disarming, or wounding the caster.  ▶   Dismissing Spells  In a single Combat Round, a caster can dismiss any Per- manent spell(s) he has cast, as a free action. Ceasing to cast a Concentration spell is immediate and not an ac- tion.  7.1.5   ⋆   Spell Traits  Unless otherwise stated all Folk Magic spells have the following traits.  They have Variable Magnitude.   This means that the Magnitude of the spell starts from the stated Magnitude and then can be cast at a higher Mag- nitude, if the caster knows it, giving an increase in the effect of the spell.  The Base Magnitude is one.  Range is equal to the caster’s POWx3 in metres.  They have a Duration of ten minutes. Other traits used by spells are detailed below.  Area (X):   The spell affects all targets within a radius specified in metres.  Concentration:   The spell’s effects will remain in place so long as the character continues to concentrate on it.   Concentrating on a spell is functionally identical to casting the spell, requiring the caster to continue to chant and ignore distractions.  Instant:   The spell’s effects take place instantly.   The spell itself then disappears.  Magnitude (X):   The strength and power of the spell. Also the minimum number of Power Points required to cast it.  Non-Variable:   The spell may only be cast at the stated Magnitude.  Permanent:   The spell’s effects remain in place until they are dispelled or dismissed.  Resist (Dodge/Persistence/Resilience):   The spell’s intended effects do not succeed automatically.   The target may make a Dodge, Persistence or Resilience test (as specified by the spell) in order to avoid the effect of the spell entirely. Note that Resist (Dodge) spells require the target to be able to use Reactions in order to Dodge. In the case of Area spells, the Resist (Dodge) trait requires the target to dive in order to mitigate the spell’s effect.  Touch:   Touch spells require the character to actually touch his target for the spell to take effect, using a Unarmed skill test to make contact.  Trigger:   The spell will lie dormant until an event stated in the description takes place.   The spell then takes effect and is expended.  7.2 Spells  ▶   Animal Whisperer  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Touch The caster whispers into the ear of a distressed an- imal, calming it.   If the distressed animal is under the influence of a spell such as Fear or Scare, then it gets another Persistence test to shake off the effect of the spell.  38   Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 41 ===

▶   Awareness  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable This spell grants the recipient awareness as if they had physically got eyes in the back of their head for the duration of the spell.   This allows them to make Perception rolls, and be aware of others behind them as they are with senses in front of them.  ▶   Babel  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Resist (Persistence) If this spell is successful, it garbles the language of the affected creature. The target can still think and, for the most part, act normally, but anything it says comes out as gibberish. Thus, a commanding officer would be unable to give orders to his men and a spellcaster would be unable to cast spells.  ▶   Beast Call  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Instant, Resist (Resilience) The Beast Call serves to attract an animal within range. When the spell is cast, it affects a targeted crea- ture with a fixed INT of 7 or less.   If it fails to resist, the creature will be naturally drawn to the place where the spell is cast, whereupon the spell effect terminates. Any barrier, immediate threat, or counter control, also ends the effects of the spell, leaving the creature to react naturally. For example, the Beast Call spell might cause a horse to turn and walk towards the spell, but a single yank of its reins by the rider would end the spell’s effect. This spell is a potent aid to hunters and herders.  ▶   Befuddle  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Resist (Persistence) This spell confuses and clouds the mind of its target if they fail a Persistence roll.   The affected target may not cast spells and may only take non-offensive actions. The target may run if it so chooses and may dodge and normally parry in combat. Any skills that have INT as a base are at a Penalty die (-1P) when tested while the target is under the effects of this spell. This spell is effective against humanoids and natural creatures.   Other creatures (such as spirits or magical beasts like dragons) are not affected by this spell.  ▶   Block Sense (Sense)  Magnitude 3, Non-Variable, Resist (Persistence) Depending on the version of this spell it will Blind/Deaf- en/Desensitise taste or smell/Numb touch on a failed resistance roll for the duration of the spell.  ▶   Call Spirit (Type)  Magnitude 3, Non-Variable, Resist (Persistence) This spell summons a single spirit of a given type from the Spirit World to do the bidding of the caster. The spirit resists the call by using its Persistence.   If it succeeds, it can return to the Spirit World.   Unless combined with a Binding attempt (see Spirit Binding Ritual), the spirit that fails a Persistence roll must per- form one action, within its power, for the caster, after which it returns to the Spirit World.  Disease spirits, inflict disease upon the possessed victim.  Passion (Fear/Madness/Pain) these spirits work upon the passions of a victim and cause mental debilitation and distress.  Healing spirits, can be used to heal wounds and drive out possessing Disease spirits.  Magic spirits, know spells and have power points that the caller may use.  Guardian Spirits, protect a location for the casters POW in minutes.  Ancestor Spirit, can pass on one piece of wisdom or increase one skill for the spell’s duration.  ▶   Care  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Touch This charm places the recipient under the care of the caster. If the caster has any active Protection or Countermagic spells, the Cared for character also bene- fits from the effects of these spells.  ▶   Clear Path  Touch This spell allows the caster to move through even the most tangled, thorny brush, as if they were on an open road. For each additional point of Magnitude, they may bring one person with him.  ▶   Coordination  Touch For every two points of Magnitude, the target’s com- bat order increases by +4, whether casting spells or fight- ing.   In addtion the target gains a Bonus die (+1B) to Dodge or DEX-based Athletics tests.  39 Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 42 ===

▶   Counter-Attack  Magnitude 1, Non-Variable, Trigger This spell lies dormant until the recipient is attacked. Then, after the normal defensive reaction of the recipi- ent, it fires off, allowing the recipient to follow up with a counter attack.   The counter attack is an additional action, on top of the recipient’s normal attacking action.  ▶   Counter-Defense  Magnitude 1, Non-Variable, Trigger This spell lies dormant until the recipient is success- fully attacked.   Then after the normal reaction of the recipient, it fires off allowing the recipient an extra reac- tion.  ▶   Countermagic  Instant Countermagic is only ever used as a Reaction, and only when another spell is cast within Countermagic’s Range that the character wishes to counter. A successful Countermagic disrupts the other spell and nullifies it. As long as Countermagic’s Magnitude equals or exceeds the target spell’s Magnitude, the target spell is countered.  ▶   Create Charms  Permanent A charm is a physical item that stores one or more Folk Magic spells.   A charm could be a necklace that holds a Befuddle 4 spell, a shield etched with runes that holds a Countermagic 2 spell, or even a sheet of paper with a poem written on it that, when held against the skin, provides a Protection 1 spell.  To create a charm a character must possess both the spell they wish to store and Create Charm at the same Magnitude.  The item into which the charm is to be cast must be prepared and in contact with the caster for the length of the casting.  If the caster spends one Improvement Point at the time of creation, the spell is reusable.   Otherwise once the spell is cast the Charm is dispelled.   A spell stored in a Charm is used like any other spell that the possessor knows. It uses the wielder’s Folk Magic Casting skill and is powered by the wielder’s Power Points.  If the caster spends three Improvement Points per Magnitude at the time of creation the spell within the Charm is reusable, once per day (1/day), with- out requiring a Folk Magic Casting skill or any Power.   It can be activated as an Action.   If the Create Charms spell is cast again then it becomes 2/day, and so on. Not all spells can be stored this way and the Gamemaster has the final say.  If the caster spends ten Improvement Points per Magnitude at the time of creation the spell within the Charm is always active, without requiring a Folk Magic Casting skill or any Power. These are the most powerful charms.   Not all spells can be stored this way and the Gamemaster has the final say.  The time taken to create a single-use Charm is one hour per point of Magnitude of the spell be- ing stored; Reusable Charms take three hours per point of Magnitude to create.  Charms are mundane items.   Breaking the item dispels the Charm.  ▶   Create Power Point Store  Permanent This spell allows the caster to create an item which has Power Point storing capabilities.   This allows the owner to have a pool of Power Points in addition to their own. Typically crystals are used, due to their physical tough- ness, in game terms treat them as unbreakable.   This also applies to charms, such as a sword with Weapon Enhancement 2 stored in it, to provide a pool of power points to cast the spell from. Power Point stores take one hour per Power Point stored in them to create. For each Magnitude, one Power Point can be stored. Unless one Improvement Point is spent when they are created they are non-reusable.   Once the Power Points are used the item loses its ability to store Power Points. If the Improvement Point is spent the item then be- comes reusable.   Once all the Power Points are used, the item can be refilled instantly from the user’s own Power Points. The caster must fill the item with their own Power Points as part of the spell. The amount of Power Points put into the item at the time of casting becomes the maximum that can be put into the item. This maximum can not be increased after the spell is cast. If the item is damaged or destroyed the Power Points are released harmlessly into the surrounding area.  ▶   Create Potions  Permanent Potions are liquids that store one or more Folk Magic spells. The Magnitude of the Create Potion spell needs to equal or exceed the highest Magnitude of the spell being stored into the potion.  All potions are one use.   They must be drunk in one swift gulp to work.  40   Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 43 ===

The potion automatically works and doesn’t incur a cost in Power Points to the person who is drink- ing it.  If multiple spells are placed in the potion, they are all cast on the drinker when the potion is drunk.  The potion costs the enchanter Power Points. They must know the spell at the Magnitude enchanting at, with the Power Points of the spell(s) placed into the potion.  There is an associated cost of 10 Gold Pieces per Magnitude in materials, which includes the flask that contains the potion.  To make the potion, the enchanter must roll suc- cessfully against Folk Magic Casting for each spell being placed in the potion and against Lore (Po- tion Making). If they fail the potion is ruined and they lose the cost of the ingredients.  Potions take one hour per point of Magnitude of spell(s) stored to create.  A potion must be stored in an airtight container, or it evaporates, losing one point of Magnitude per week.  ▶   Create Scrolls  Permanent This spell allows the caster to create a written version of the spell for later use. Either to impart knowledge of the spell to a trainee or as a reference when casting the spell in the field.  The caster must be able to read and write in some form of written language, which is represented by having a Language skill of over 80%.   They must also pay for the special inks and scroll paper (10 Gold Pieces per point of magnitude).  The trainee must be able to read the language that the scroll uses. Once every three months they may study the scroll, which takes one day per magni- tude of the spell, and then make a Language skill test. If successful, they spend the normal Improve- ment Point cost to learn the spell.   If they roll a critical they spend half that cost, to the nearest whole unit.   If they fumble, they can never learn the spell from that scroll, it is beyond their under- standing.  To directly cast a spell from the scroll, the caster must be able to read the language the scroll uses. Then cast the spell as normal.   Casting is much slower than if the caster is casting the spell from memory. First, the caster reads the spell out loud and then harnesses and shapes the magical ener- gies. Therefore, no matter what their normal cast- ing skill, the spell takes an entire combat round to cast, and fires off at the end of the combat round.  ▶   Cushion Fall  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable The successful casting of the spell eliminates all falling damange for the recipient for the duration of the spell.  ▶   Darkwall  Area 5, Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Concentration Light sources within a Darkwall area shed no light and normal sight ceases to function. Other senses such as a bat’s sonar function normally.   The caster may move the Darkwall 15 metres per Combat Round if they con- centrate on the spell.  ▶   Demoralise  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Resist (Persistence) This spell creates doubt and uncertainty into the very heart and soul of the target.   The target of this spell has all Weapon skills halved and may not cast offensive spells.   If this spell takes effect before combat begins, the target will try to avoid fighting and will either run or surrender. The effects of this spell are automatically cancelled by the Fanaticism spell and vice versa.  ▶   Detect (X)  Magnitude 1, Non-Variable, Concentration This covers a family of spells that all operate in a similar fashion, allowing the caster to locate the closest target of the spell within its range. This effect is stopped by a thick substance, such as metal, earth or stone, if it  41 Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 44 ===

is at least one metre thick. It is also blocked by Counter- magic, though the caster will know the target is some- where within range (though not its precise location) and that it is being protected by Countermagic.   The sep- arate Detect spells are listed below and each must be learned separately.  Detect Enemy:   Gives the location of the nearest creatures, that intend to harm the caster.  Detect Magic:   Gives the location of the nearest magic item, magical creature or active spell.  Detect Species: Each Detect Species spell will give the location of the nearest creature of the speci- fied species. Examples of this spell include Detect Goblin, Detect Rhino and Detect Elf.  Detect Substance:   Each Detect Substance spell will give the location of the nearest substance of the specified type. Examples of this spell include Detect Coal, Detect Gold and Detect Wood.  ▶   Dispel Magic  Instant This spell will attack and eliminate other spells. Dis- pel Magic will eliminate a combined Magnitude of spells equal to its own Magnitude, starting with the most pow- erful affecting the target.   If it fails to eliminate any spell (because the spell’s Magnitude is too high), then its effects immediately end and no more spells will be eliminated.   A spell cannot be partially eliminated, so a target under the effects of a spell whose Magnitude is higher than that of Dispel Magic will not have any spells currently affecting it eliminated.  ▶   Disruption  Instant, Resist (Resilience) Disruption literally pulls a target’s body apart. The target will suffer 1D4 points of damage per point of Mag- nitude, ignoring any Armour Points.  ▶   Dragon Fire  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Instant, Resist (Dodge) With this spell, the caster throws a stream of fire at his target. If the fire is not dodged, it inflicts 1D10 points of heat damage. Armour Points are effective against this damage and it counts as both magical and fire damage.  ▶   Drive Out Spirit  Instant, Resist (Persistence) This spell excommunicates a spirit that is either dom- inantly or covertly possessing a character or physical lo- cation. The spirit resists eviction from its host using its  Persistence, with a penalty of -10% for every Magnitude point of the spell. If the spirit fails the test, it goes back to the Spirit World.  ▶   Dull Weapon  This spell can be cast on any weapon. For every point of Magnitude it reduces the damage dealt by the target weapon by one.   This spell does not affect the damage inflicted by the damage bonus of the user.  ▶   Enhance Skill (X)  Instant Like Detect (X), this includes a number of differ- ent spells, each of which affects a different non-combat skill. For every 2 points of Magnitude, the recipient gains a Bonus die (+1B) to any skill test using the Enhanced skill. Alternatively, for each additional 2 points of Mag- nitude of the spell, the caster can affect one more tar- get. The bonuses and targets can be split as necessary, providing each bonus is a Bonus die (+1B) (costing 2 Magnitude). For example, Adjin may have Enhance Skill (Decep- tion) 4.   He could cast it all on himself to give two Bonus dice (+2B) to his Deception, or could cast it on himself and an ally, giving himself a Bonus die (+1B) and his ally a Bonus die (+1B). The most common spells of this type are:  Enhance Skill (Deception), often used by thieves.  Enhance Skill (Trade), used by merchants.  Enhance Skill (Influence), used by lawyers, con- artists and officers.  42   Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 45 ===

Enhance Skill (Resilience), used by warriors.  Enhance Skill (Persistence) used by magicians. These spells are sometimes called by other names, such as “Cover of Night” or “Shadowstealth” (for En- hance Deception), “Golden Tongue” (for Enhance Influ- ence or Trade), or “Toughen” (for Enhance Resilience).  ▶   Extinguish  Instant This spell instantly puts out fires.   At Magnitude 1 it can extinguish a Flame, Magnitude 2 a Small Fire, Magnitude 3 a Large Fire and Magnitude 4 will put out an Inferno.  ▶   Extra Defense  Magnitude 2 For every two points of Magnitude the target gains one extra reaction per combat round.  ▶   Fanaticism  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable The target of this spell will have close combat and unarmed combat skills increased by a Bonus die (+1B) but may not attempt to parry, dodge or cast spells. Also for the duration of the spell the target has two Bonus dice (+2B) bonus to any Persistence test related to Morale. The effects of this spell are automatically cancelled by the Demoralise spell and vice versa.  ▶   Farsight  Concentration Each point of this spell extends the caster’s field of vision by twenty metres as long as they maintain their concentration. Although they can see small details at a distance, this spell does not let the caster see through walls or other obstructions.  ▶   Fire Missile  Magnitude 4, Non-Variable, Touch Casting this spell on a ranged weapon will cause mis- siles fired/throwed to burst into flame.   When it hits a target, the missile will deal a die higher than normal of magical fire damage (1D6 becomes 1d8, 2d8 becomes 2d10, etc).   A missile weapon under the effects of Fire Missile cannot benefit from Multi Missile or Speedart. Since Fire Missile does magical damage, it damages crea- tures immune to normal damage.  ▶   Fire Weapon  Magnitude 4, Non-Variable, Touch For the duration of the spell, the target melee weapon will deal a die higher than normal of magical fire dam- age. A weapon under the effects of Fire Weapon cannot benefit from Weapon Enhance. Since Fire Weapon does magical damage, it damages creatures immune to normal damage.  ▶   Fist of Gold  Instant This spell creates a minor illusion of 10D10 Gold Pieces per level of Magnitude that persists for the dura- tion of the spell.  ▶   Fist of the Wind  Instant Each point of Magnitude allows the caster to make one extra unarmed attack.   These attacks happen in a blur of motion, at the same Combat Order that the nor- mal attack occurs.  ▶   Flying Kick  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable This spell allows the recipient to make a normal move as a flying leap through the air, then make a Kick attack at the end of the move.  ▶   Frostbite  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Instant, Resist (Resilience) This attack spell allows the caster to freeze their op- ponent, dealing 1D8 points of damage, ignoring any Ar- mour Points.   Magical protection against cold damage can block this effect, but mundane items (such as cold weather gear) are ineffective.  ▶   Glue  Area, Touch This spell covers an area of one centimetre square for each Magnitude with extremely sticky glue. If a creature steps on the glue, it must make an Athletics roll vs the Magnitude x 10% to avoid being stuck for one round. On subsequent rounds it must make the same roll to break free. This spell can also be used for more conventional repairs, a broken sword for example, with Magnitude x 10% being the chance that the item won’t break again, if used in circumstances that would cause it to.  43 Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 46 ===

▶   Hand of Death  Instant, Magnitude 4, Non-Variable, Resist (Resilience), Touch This fearsome spell allows the caster to deal an aw- ful wound with the merest touch. Casting the Hand of Death, charges his body with the spell. Touching an un- suspecting target, or succeeding at an Unarmed attack against a wary target, releases the spell’s effect.   If the Resilience test to resist the effect is failed, the victim immediately loses half their maximum Hit Points, and suffers a a Major Wound. If the Resilience test is a suc- cess, the target only loses 1D3 Hit Points. Armour does not protect against this damage.  ▶   Harden  Magnitude 1, Non-Variable, Touch This spell makes a target item unbreakable for the duration of the spell. Therefore weapons with this spell cast on them will not break when a Fumble is rolled in combat, and it allows items that are normally too brittle to be wielded in combat to be used as improvised weapons.  ▶   Heal  Instant, Touch For every point of Magnitude of this spell, the caster can repair one Hit Point of damage to either himself or another target.   In addition, a Heal spell of any Mag- nitude will stabilise a character suffering from a Major Wound, and/or revive a character who is unconscious. A Magnitude 4 (or two consequtive Heal 3 spells) or higher Heal spell will also cure any single poison or disease affecting the target. A Magnitude 6 (or two consequtive Heal 5 spells) or higher Heal spell will also repair the effects of a single Major Wound.  ▶   Hinder Skill (X)  Resist (Persistence) Like Enhance Skill (X), this is a number of different spells, each of which affects a different skill.   For every 2 points of Magnitude of the spell, the target gains a Penalty die (-1P) to the next skill test using the affected skill. Alternatively, for each additional 2 points of Magni- tude of the spell, the caster can affect one more target. The penalties and targets can be split as necessary pro- viding each penalty is a Penalty die (-1P) (costing 2 Magnitude). If used in this way, each target is affected separately; if one target succeeds on resisting the spell, other targets may fail and be affected. The most common spells of this type are:   Hinder Skill (Perception), often used by thieves; Hinder Skill (Trade), used by the nastier traders; and Hinder Skill (Persistence) used by magicians against enemy spell- casters prior to casting spells upon them.  ▶   Ignite  Instant, Magnitude 1, Non-Variable Ignite will set fire to anything flammable within range, creating a flame. Skin or flesh cannot be ignited and if the target is attached to a living being (such as hair, fur or clothes) then the spell gains the Resist (Resilience) trait.  ▶   Invisibility  Magnitude 4, Non-Variable, Concentration, Touch, Per- sonal For the duration of the spell the recipient is com- pletely invisible to sight.   They can still be heard, felt or smelled, with a Penalty die (-1P) to Perception tests. Also, the spell is automatically dispelled if the caster loses concentration, or the recipient casts a spell or makes an attack.   The recipient also becomes visible immedi- ately after the spell ending, so even if the caster im- mediately casts another Invisibility spell there will be a delay between castings where the recipient is visible.  ▶   Invoke Ancestor Spirit  Magnitude 3, Non-Variable, Resist (Persistence) This spell in many ways resembles Call Spirit, but specifically summons one of the characters deceased an- cestors to aid them. The ancestor that appears is usually random, but if the character knows the name of an ances- tor that he has summoned before then they can summon them again.   The ancestor is not always guaranteed to  44   Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 47 ===

be friendly to the player.   Roll D100 and if the roll is 96-00 the spirit is hostile, holding some grudge against the characters bloodline and will attack them in Spirit Combat.   Otherwise the Ancestor can covertly possess the character for its POW in minutes. For the duration of this possession it will share its knowledge and magic (see page 108).  ▶   Ironmind  Touch This spell hardens the resolve of the character that it is cast upon for its duration. Each 2 levels of Magnitude of the spell adds a Bonus die (+1B) to all Persistence tests against magical attacks to the mind (e.g.   Fear, Befuddle etc.) or opposed tests vs Influence.  ▶   Knock Back  Instant, Resist (Resilience) On a failed resistance roll the target of this spell is knocked back a number of metres equal to the spell’s magnitude.  ▶   Knockdown  Instant, Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Resist (Resilience) On a failed resistance roll the target of this spell is knocked down prone.  ▶   Leap  Touch, Resist (Dodge) This spell causes the target to leap 2m up in the air for each point of Magnitude. If cast upon an unwilling target, who fails their resistance roll, they will then fall to earth taking normal falling damage (see page 80).  ▶   Levitating Disc  Concentration, Area 1 per Magnitude This spell creates an invisible disc 1m in diameter for each point of Magnitude. It can carry weight equivalent to one person and their belongings per point of Magni- tude, and moves at twice the Magnitude in metres per combat round. So for example, a Levitating Disc with Magnitude 3 can carry 3 people, is 3m in diameter, and moves at a rate of 6m per combat round.  ▶   Light  Magnitude 1, Non-Variable, Area 10 When cast on a physical object (including living ma- terial), this spell causes the object to shed light across the area of effect.   The spell illuminates only the spec- ified area – everything outside the area of effect is not lit. This spell creates raw light, not a flame.  ▶   Lock  Touch, Permanent This spell adds a resistance to being opened to a lock equal to the spell’s Magnitude x 10%.   The item must have a lock, such as might be found on a door or a chest, and the spell is focused on that lock. Once the lock has been forced/picked the spell ends.  ▶   Mindspeech  This spell can affect one target for every point of Magnitude. It allows telepathy between the caster and any target, though targets will not have telepathy with one another. The words transmitted by telepathy must be whispered and will be heard directly in the head of the recipient, in the same language in which it was spoken.  ▶   Mobility  For every point of Magnitude of this spell, the tar- get’s Movement Rate will be increased by 2m.  ▶   Multi Attack  Instant Each point of Magnitude allows the caster to make one extra close-combat attack. These attacks happen in a blur of motion at the same Combat Order that the normal attack occurs. Each casting of the spell grants a single flurry of such attacks.  ▶   Multi Missile  Trigger If the caster succeeds in casting the spell, a missile is charged with the spell for ten minutes. A missile un- der the effects of Multi Missile cannot benefit from Fire Missile or Speedart. When the enchanted missile is fired/thrown, one ad- ditional magical missile is created for every point of Mag- nitude.   Each magical missile’s attack is rolled for sep- arately and each does the same damage as the original (though they will not benefit from the character’s dam- age modifier).   Magical missiles created through Multi Missile will not cause critical hits, though the original missile can. Magical missiles created through Multi Mis- sile will affect creatures that can only be hurt by magic.  45 Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 48 ===

▶   Noxious Vapours  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Area 10, Resist (Resilience) This spell fills a volume 10 metres in radius with thick choking green gas.   Any living creature that breathes oxygen wh