

=== PAGE 1 ===

FANTASY CRUX  An Open D100 System created by Konstantinos Karasavvas

=== PAGE 2 ===

Contents  Part I   Base System   1  1   Characters   2 1.1   Player Characters . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2 1.2   Character Generation   . . . . . . . . . . .   2 1.3   Improving Characters   . . . . . . . . . . .   7 2   Skills   9 2.1   The Basic Skill Test   . . . . . . . . . . . .   9 2.2   Bonus/Penalty Dice   . . . . . . . . . . . .   10 2.3   Opposed Skill Tests   . . . . . . . . . . . .   12 2.4   Very High Skills   . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12 2.5   Assistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13 2.6   Skill Descriptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13 3   Equipment   17 3.1   In-game Economics . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17 3.2   The Equipment Lists . . . . . . . . . . . .   18 3.3   Close Combat Weapons   . . . . . . . . . .   18 3.4   Ranged Weapons . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18 3.5   Armour   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19 3.6   General Items . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20 3.7   Transportation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22 3.8   Food & Lodging   . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22 4   Combat   23 4.1   Combat is Tough . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23 4.2   Summary of Combat . . . . . . . . . . . .   23 4.3   Encounter Distance . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24 4.4   Combat Actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24 4.5   Movement Actions   . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29 4.6   Reactions   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29 4.7   Other Actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30 4.8   Critical Hits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30 4.9   Fumbles   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30 4.10 Damage   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30 4.11 Special Combat Rules   . . . . . . . . . . .   31  Part II   Disciplines and Powers   33  5   Disciplines   34 5.1   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   34 5.2   Power   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   34 6   Battle   35 6.1   Spot Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35 6.2   Techniques   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35 7   Folk Magic   37 7.1   Spot Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37 7.2   Spells   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38 7.3   Spirits   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   49 7.4   Creating Magic Items   . . . . . . . . . . .   50 8   Arcane Magic   51 8.1   Arcane Magic Ranks . . . . . . . . . . . .   51 8.2   Spot Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   52 8.3   Spells   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   54 8.4   Creating Magic Items   . . . . . . . . . . .   60 9   Divine Magic   61 9.1   Religions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   61 9.2   Spells   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   68  Part III   Game Master   77  10 Adventuring   78 10.1 Spot Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   78 11 Gamemaster Tools   82 11.1 Plunder Rating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   82 11.2 Ships and Sailing . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   82 11.3 Mass Combat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   84 11.4 Skill Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   84 11.5 Fantasy Races . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   85 11.6 Player Archetypes   . . . . . . . . . . . . .   86 11.7 Traits, Talents, Feats . . . . . . . . . . . .   86 11.8 Minor NPCs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   87 11.9 Epic Characters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   87 12 Creatures   88 12.1 Animals   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   89 12.2 Monsters   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   92 12.3 Nymphs   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105 12.4 Spirits   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108 12.5 Undead   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112 A   OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a   116 B   Acknowledgements and Art   117  ii   Contents

=== PAGE 3 ===

PartI Base System

=== PAGE 4 ===

CHAPTER 1  Characters  1.1 Player Characters  A Player Character (PC) is your representation in the game. Your eyes, ears, touch, feel and smell in the imag- inary world that you and your fellow players create. On one hand the character is a collection of num- bers which describe their characteristics, skills and magic spells that are written down on a character sheet.   This chapter will explain how you create these numbers, in a process known as Character Generation.   But that is only half of what a character is. The other half exists mainly in the imagination of the player, with perhaps some quick notes on the character sheet. This half is the personality of the character and other intangibles such as goals and past history. These are the things that you can’t express in cold hard num- bers, which really bring the character to life and give the player guidelines on how the character acts and thinks.  1.2 Character Generation  Fantasy Crux character generation is a multi-step pro- cess and at each step the Player makes decisions about what their character is like at the beginning of their ad- venturing career.  1.2.1   ⋆   Concept  A character concept is a one sentence summing up of what the character is all about. Example  Rurik is “A determined and foolhardy warrior seeking excitement and adventure.”  Lura is “A mysterious and elegant arcane magic user.”  Mancala is “The illegitimate son of a murdered Noble, who survives through being a rogue.”  Abnon is “A pious priest who smites evil and protects the innocent.”  Having a clear concept of what you want your char- acter to be like at the beginning of character generation guides the whole process as you make choices to generate the numbers that you will roll against during play. For example, for Rurik it states clearly that he is a warrior, therefore when choosing skills Rurik puts points into Dodge and Unarmed combat, both skills that will be highly useful when he gets into a fight, rather than any of the Lores. You are of course free to change the concept as you generate the character. Generally, as a rule, the stronger the character concept, the easier it is to create an inter- esting character. In one sentence sum up what your character is all about.   Use the guidelines above to give yourself ideas. Ask the other Players what their character concepts are to make sure the group has an interesting selection of characters. Check with your Gamemaster that your character concept fits in with the type of game that the group is going to be playing.  1.2.2   ⋆   Characteristics  These are the primary building blocks of the character. All characters and creatures have seven characteristics, which give the basic information about the character’s physical, mental and spiritual capabilities. As well as being useful indicators of how to roleplay the character (see below) they are the scores that skills are initially based upon. The characteristics are:  Strength (STR):   A character’s brute force, Strength affects the amount of damage he deals, what weapons he can wield effectively, how much he can lift and so on.  Constitution (CON):   A measure of the character’s health, Constitution affects how much damage he can sustain in combat, as well as his general resistance to disease and other illnesses.  Dexterity (DEX):   A character’s agility, co-ordination and speed of reaction, Dexterity aids him in many physical actions, including combat.  Size (SIZ):   This is an indication of the character’s mass and, like Strength and Constitution, can affect the amount of damage a character can deal and how well he can absorb damage.  Intelligence (INT):   A character’s ability to think around problems, analyse information and memorise instruc- tions. It is a very useful Characteristic for characters interested in becoming accomplished spellcasters.  2   Chapter 1.   Characters

=== PAGE 5 ===

Power (POW):   Perhaps the most abstract Charac- teristic, Power is a measure of the character’s life force and the strength of his willpower. It is the basis of all extraordinary or supernatural powers (see Disciplines and Powers in Part II).  Charisma (CHA):   This quantifies a character’s at- tractiveness and leadership qualities. Each characteristic starts with a value of 8.   You next have 30 points to distribute amongst them.   The maximum value of a characteristic during character gen- eration is 18.   You may also lower a characteristic to gain extra points.   For example, reduce STR 8 to 6 to gain 2 points, but INT and SIZ have a minimum value of 7. Other characteristics have a minimum value of 3, although this indicates that the character has a severe disadvantage in this area. This method is appropriate if you already have a clear idea of your character concept as it gives you precise con- trol on the relative strength of each characteristic. You are not at the mercy of random dice rolls (see Random Characteristics optional rule) nor do you have to negoti- ate with your Gamemaster about switching the random rolls around so that the characteristic scores match your concept. Example  Rob is playing Rurik, who is a rough and ready warrior, and spends his 30 points in the following way.  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  18   12   12   16   10   8   10  He adds ten, four, and eight to STR, CON and SIZ respectively to get a higher damage modifier and hit points total and for the ‘big bruiser’ element of the character concept, and four to DEX since that im- proves when he acts in initiative and is the base for many important skills for warriors.   Finally he adds two points to both INT and CHA, to make sure Rurik is average for Intelligence and sociability. He chooses not to increase POW at character creation since he doesn’t really see Rurik as much of a magic user at the start of the game.  For any race the maximum value of any characteristic is the maximum dice roll plus three. For Humans this is 21. One feature of the points buy system is that it tends to produce characters that are close to the average score, unless you choose to reduce one of your characteristics from the initial allocation of eight or leave it unmodi- fied. By taking that approach you will have some weak characteristics, such as a DEX of 8 indicating that your character is a bit slow and clumsy, but you will also have a few strong characteristics, such as an INT of 18 which shows your character is a natural born genius. You can also end up with characters with high and low characteristics using the random method as well. Such characters may at first glance look undesirable,  on account of how base skills are affected, but actually they present good opportunities for roleplaying the flaws of the character, and actually makes the character more interesting as a result. Random Characteristics Players can also roll for characteristics.   For human characters roll 4D6 for STR, CON, DEX, POW and CHA and 3D6+6 for INT and SIZ. Discard the lowest die. You may swap one pair.  1.2.3   ⋆   Attributes  Attributes are a set of secondary scores that define the character’s potential to do and take physical damage, how quickly they move, and the amount of extraordi- nary or supernatural powers available to the charac- ter. Attributes are determined from the character’s char- acteristic scores.  Damage Modifier (DM):   The Damage Modifier ap- plies whenever the character uses a weapoin (except crossbows).   It is used to show that bigger, stronger, characters deal out more damage than smaller, weaker characters.   To work out your character’s Damage Modifier, add Strength and Size together and look at table 1.1.  Hit Points (HP):   These determine how much dam- age the character can sustain before reaching uncon- sciousness or death.   Hit Points equal Size plus Con- stitution divided by 2, rounded up.  Major Wound Level:   When the character takes this amount of damage in one go, they suffer a Major Wound. Major Wounds are injuries, such as a severed limb, broken ribcage or broken skull, which may ren- der the character unconscious immediately and leave  3 Chapter 1.   Characters

=== PAGE 6 ===

STR + SIZ   Damage Modifier  1-10   -1D6 11-15   -1D4 16-25   +0 26-30   +1D4 31-45   +1D6 46-60   +2D6 61-75   +3D6 Every additional +15   +1D6  Table 1.1: Damage Modifier table permanent affects if not healed by supernatural pow- ers. Major Wound Level is equal to Total Hit Points divided by 2, rounded up.  Power Points (PP):   These are used to activate any extraordinary or supernatural powers the character knows.   If it is reduced to zero the character drops unconscious until they regain at least one point. The character’s starting Power Points will be equal to the character’s POW.  Movement Rate:   This is the amount in metres that a character can move in a five second Combat Round. Human characters have a Movement rate of 15 metres.  Combat Order:   This is the order in which the char- acter acts during combat. To calculate Combat Order add DEX and INT and divide by 2.   Then substract your armour’s ENC from the result. Rounding Numbers in Fantasy Crux are always rounded to the nearest whole number.   Always round up from 0.5 and round down from below 0.5.   For example 4.1 becomes 4, while 5.5 becomes 6.  1.2.4   ⋆   Skills  Skills are things that the character can do. They repre- sent very specific areas of expertise and when the skill is used in play the percentage value of the skill is rolled against using a D100 to work out if a character success- fully completes a task in the game.   A roll equal to or less than the skill percentage usually indicates that the skill has been used successfully. Example  Rurik has a Dodge of 52%, which means that in com- bat he has to roll 52 or under on D100 to avoid the incoming blows of his opponent.  Table 1.2 translates the skill percentage into a real world description of the level of expertise.  Skill   Expertise   Description  0-25%   Novice   Someone with virtually no ex- perience with the skill. 26-50%   Apprentice   Someone who is learning the skill. 51-75%   Veteran   Someone who regularly uses the skill as part of their everyday life. 76-99%   Expert   A local expert with the skill, who can perform it under most conditions with ease and ele- gance. 100+   Master   The acknowledged best in that skill, and regularly performs the impossible in extremely difficult conditions.  Table 1.2: Skill and Expertise From looking at the above table you can see that Rurik with his Dodge of 52% is quite proficient, hav- ing an expertise level of Veteran, probably from being in actual combat on several occasions and learning by necessity to get out of the way of weapon attacks.  ▶   Skill Lists  The following tables lists all the skills that every charac- ter possesses and the Characteristics used to determine the skill’s base score.   The tables also give each skill a brief description of what the skill does, but a fuller de- scription is given in the Skills chapter. Skills are grouped into categories for easy reference:  Resistances   are skills that get the character out of harms way.  Combat skills   measure the characters skills in physical violence.  Knowledge skills   measure the intellectual skills of the character.  Practical skills   measure the characters’ ability of per- forming a variety of everyday and specialist tasks. Some skills like Lore (Type), Craft (Type) and Cul- ture (Other) all have a descriptor in brackets after the main skill name.   This denotes that at time of points allocation the player must decide what Type or Other is.   For example Lore (Type) could be Lore (Heraldry) or Lore (Astronomy). It’s worth putting the majority of your points into Dodge if you are going down the route of the Warrior with your character. If you are thinking more of a magic using character, Persistence is probably more appropri- ate.   Resilience is good for hardy characters that can shrug off disease and stay conscious when they take dam- age.  4   Chapter 1.   Characters

=== PAGE 7 ===

Skill   Base   Description  Dodge   DEX+10   Gets you out of the way of physical threats, such as an incoming axe or dragon breath. Persistence   POW+10   Is   a   measure   of   your character’s willpower and resistance against hostile magic and is also rolled to resist attempts to influ- ence the character against their will. Resilience   CON+POW   Is a measure of your char- acter’s   health   and   their ability to survive exposure, hunger and thirst.   It is also their chance to resist the effects of diseases.  Table 1.3: Resistances  Skill   Base   Description  Close Combat DEX+STR   A   character’s   skill   with melee   weapons,   such   as swords,   axes,   daggers, spears and shields. Ranged Combat DEX+INT   A character’s skill with mis- sile and thrown weapons. Unarmed Combat DEX+STR   A character’s skill with nat- ural weapons such as bite, fist, kick, grapple and claws.  Table 1.4: Combat Skills It goes without saying that all these skills are ap- propriate for characters who want to be warriors.   A few points however in either close or unarmed combat are useful even for non-combative characters since these skills can be used for self-defence. Knowledge skills are good for characters that are sages or scholars and who make their living from obscure information that other people do not have the time to learn.   Culture (other) and Language (other) are also useful to characters whose abilities revolve around com- munications, such as merchants and diplomats. On the face of it, it is tempting to see the Practical category as a big grab bag of miscellaneous skills. How- ever it is worth spending some points on one to three of the skills, even if you want to be a big muscled warrior. These skills allow the character to do things in game, and Athletics, Influence and Perception get called upon  Skill   Base   Description  Culture (Own)   INT+10   What   a   character knows   about   the history, politics, geog- raphy of their own land and society. Language (Own)   INT+50   How   fluent   a   charac- ter is at speaking and potentially reading and writing their own lan- guage. Natural Lore   INT+10   Predicting the weather, recognizing and caring for animals and plants, geology and survival in the natural world. Culture (Other)   INT   What   a   character knows   about   the history,   politics   and geography of a foreign land. Language (Other)   INT   How   fluent   a   charac- ter is at speaking and potentially reading and writing   a   foreign   lan- guage. Lore (Type)   INT   Other specialist knowl- edge skills, such as Lore (Herbalist), Lore (Her- aldry) not covered by the above.  Table 1.5: Knowledge Skills  5 Chapter 1.   Characters

=== PAGE 8 ===

Skill   Base   Description  Athletics   DEX+STR   This   skill   measures   the characters’s   ability   at running, lifting, jumping, swimming and climbing. Craft   INT+10   This   skill   allows   you to   make   things,   such as   pots,   weapons,   and buildings. Deception   DEX+INT   Stealth, hiding and pick- ing pockets are all han- dled by this skill. Driving   DEX+INT   This skill covers ancient- medieval period vehicles such   as   carts,   chariots and wagons. Engineering   INT+10   Large scale construction and   siege   engines   are covered by this skill. Healing   INT+10   Healing   wounds   and treating   disease   using first aid and surgery. Influence   CHA+10   This skill is used when the   character   wants   to persuade another to do something   against   their normal interests. Mechanisms   DEX+INT   Locks and anything with complex moving parts are covered by this skill. Perception   INT+POW   Used to spot hidden ob- jects and spot small de- tails   in   the   character’s environment. Performance   CHA+10   Acting,   playing   instru- ments,   dancing   and singing are all covered by this skill. Riding   DEX+POW   Used when trying tricky manoeuvres using beasts of burden, such as horses, camels and more fantas- tic   beasts   such   as   hip- pogriffs. Sailing   DEX+INT   This skill covers the use of ships and boats. Streetwise   CHA+POW   How   well   the   character operates in a city envi- ronment.   Used to find out information and nav- igate around the streets and   find   a   fence   for stolen goods are all cov- ered by this skill. Trade   INT+10   This is the skill used by merchants and traders to value and sell goods.  Table 1.6: Practical Skills reasonably frequently.   Also if your character’s concept is that of a rogue Deception, Mechanisms and Street- wise also deserve some points. If your character is some- one who makes stuff, Craft and Engineering are skills to increase.   If your character has a background of en- tertaining people Performance is a skill to pick. If your character concept is any form of merchant Trade is a must buy.  ▶   Calculate Skills  For each skill calculate the starting skill value, the base score, from the calculation provided. Then write it down on the character sheet next to the skill. During character generation the player gets a pool of points to spend on each group of skills. Distribute points between the skills, with a limit of no more than 30 to be allocated to any one skill.  Resistances   Spend 50 points between the three skills. Combat   Spend 50 points between the three skills. Knowledge   Spend 50 points between the skills. Practical   Spend 75 points between skills.  For Players that want more flexibility they can use the following rules to further customize their characters:  Reduce up to 20 Combat points to increase Knowl- edge points at a 1:2 ratio;   thus for 10 Combat points a character can get 20 additional Knowledge points; remember that no skill can be increased by more than 30 points during character creation.  Reduce up to 10 points from Resistances, Com- bat or Practical skill categories to gain extra Im- provement Points (see page 7) at a 5:1 ratio; a total of 6 IPs can be acquired this way. These IPs can only be used to get extra Disciplines/Powers and increase Characteristics. Moreover, the start- ing limit of characteristics still apply.  1.2.5   ⋆   Special Training  Player Characters are extraordinary.   On top of them being above average they may also have special train- ing. This can manifest in improved skills or characteris- tics or even focusing in specific Disciplines. A Discipline may represent training in advanced combat techniques or magic powers or anything extraordinary or supernat- ural. Each character begins play with ten Improvement Points (see page 7) that allow players to further improve in skills or even acquire new Disciplines. For choices of Disciplines and their Powers consult the chapters in Part II.  1.2.6   ⋆   Equipment  Each character typically starts off with some money and the tools of their trade. Starting cash is 4D6 x 10 in Silver Pieces. In addition each character starts out with one of the two arms and armour packages below.  6   Chapter 1.   Characters

=== PAGE 9 ===

Leather armour, ranged weapon, close combat 2H weapon and dagger.  Leather armour, shield, ranged weapon, close com- bat 1H weapon and dagger. All characters also start out with the following equip- ment: backpack, rope, two weeks worth of traveling pro- visions, flint and tinder, waterskin. Further information about equipment and game eco- nomics is given in the chapter 3. Your Gamemaster may allow you to buy additional equipment before the game starts from the character’s starting cash.  1.2.7   ⋆   Finishing Touches  By this stage all the hard decisions on making your char- acter are over.   All that remains is to note down a few numbers on the character sheet and ponder about the character’s background and motives.  ▶   Age  Human characters start out at any age between 18 and 28. To randomly determine this, roll 2D6 and add 16.  ▶   Hero Points  Every character starts with two Hero Points. Hero points are what distinguishes the player character from the nor- mal stay at home type folk. They allow the player char- acter to:  Re-roll any failed dice roll.  Downgrade a Major Wound to a normal wound. Full damage is applied to the character’s Hit Points, but do not suffer the messy effects of a major wound.  Avoid character death. If the character’s Hit Points are reduced to zero or less, instead of dying the character is merely unconscious. The character re- mains in such a state until the combat is over at which point they awaken with one Hit Point.  Any other bonus or benefit to accomplish some- thing at the Gamemaster discretion. This can in- clude editing the plot. More than one Hero Points may be used (from multiple characters if desired) and something in favour of the players will hap- pen.   The Gamemaster may allow the players to choose the plot edit. An example of an one point edit would be a guard to forget to lock the cell that the characters are imprisoned. An example of a five points edit would be a dragon to happen to attack the castle giving the opportunity to escape! Once Hero Points are spent they are gone. The Game- master awards Hero Points at the end of the game session for moments of outstanding heroic play or for significant achievements.  ▶   Background, Appearance and Personality  A background is useful not only to give the character a history before the game starts but also as a way of noting all the intangible elements of the character’s personality. Even if you don’t create a fully written up back- ground it is worth making a mental note of what the character is like as a person and roughly what their back- ground is previous to play, as well as visualizing what they actually look like.  1.3 Improving Characters  1.3.1   ⋆   Improvement Points  Through their adventures characters will earn experi- ence, awarded by the Gamemaster as a reward for cer- tain achievements. This experience, called Improvement Points, will allow characters to improve.  ▶   Improving Skills  A player can choose to spend one Improvement Point to increase one or two skills.   Select one or two skills that are below 51% to be increased and split 5% points to those skills. Skills from 51% to 99% are increased by only 3% for each IP and skills at Mastery level, i.e. 100% or more, require one IP for a 1% in a single skill. A skill cannot be raised by more than 5% per advancement but there is no upper limit to the score a skill can reach.  ▶   Improving Characteristics  A player can choose to spend five Improvement Points to increase one Characteristic by one point.   SIZ may never be increased using Improvement Points.   The maximum a human character can increase a Characteristic to is  7 Chapter 1.   Characters

=== PAGE 10 ===

21. For non-humans, the maximum for a Characteristic is equal to the maximum possible starting score for the Characteristic plus three.  ▶   Acquiring Disciplines and Powers  A player can choose to spend Improvement Points to acquire new Disciplines. Consult the appropriate Disci- pline chapter for details of how many points are required to get the Discipline as well as how much is required to get each Power within it.  1.3.2   ⋆   Practice & Research  The characters may often experience long stretches of downtime between adventures.   This is quite normal. Group members may need to heal from wounds suffered during the last adventure, the characters may engage in some activity that takes time, or life may simply return to normal until the next danger to face the player char- acters appears. During such downtime the characters may improve their characters. The players might actually request down- time between adventures to learn new skills and it is up to the Gamemaster to determine if this is appropriate. For each three month period of practice or research a character may gain 1 Improvement Point.  8   Chapter 1.   Characters

=== PAGE 11 ===

CHAPTER 2  Skills  Characters use skills to get things done in the game. When the outcome of an action is in doubt, the Game- master will ask the player to make a skill test against the relevant skill to see if his character is successful. Example  John:   Rurik comes to a large and very deep ravine. Far below he can hear water rushing along the bot- tom of the ravine, and in front of him are the re- mains of a rope bridge that has been deliberately broken.  Rob:   How far across is it?  John:   About four metres.  Rob:   Ok,   Rurik is going to take a running jump across the ravine.  John:   Give me an Athletics skill test, since that cov- ers Jumping. You do realise that if Rurik fails he’s facing a very nasty fall?  Rob:   Yeah, Rurik works that out, but decides to worry about that when and if it happens.   Rurik’s athletics is 60%. Rob rolls a D100, his red dice (tens) comes up 3 and his white dice (units) comes up 4.  Rob:   34, a success.   Rurik takes a running jump across the ravine and is now on the other side. What’s there?  This chapter describes when and how to make skill tests, how to gain Bonus or Penalty dice on your skill depending upon the conditions the test is made under, and how to judge tests where two characters are com- peting against each other. Finally, a list of skills used in the game is detailed.  2.1 The Basic Skill Test  To make a skill test the player first describes what their character is doing. Then they roll a D100 and compare this to the relevant skill’s score. If the dice roll is equal to or less than the skill’s score, the attempt is success- ful. If the total is greater than the skill’s score, then it has failed. The Gamemaster then describes the result of the character’s success or failure.   Note that a D100 is  typically rolled with 2D10s, one for the tens and one for the units (if both results are 0 than you rolled 100!). Under normal conditions a skill test is asked for when the character is placed on the spot and has to make a successful action under pressure. Example  An apprentice potter (Craft 26%) will, day in day out, produce a couple of pots of passable quality if working at his Master’s workshop. Of course, work beyond the skill of the character is still out of their reach, unless the player decides to take the chance with the dice and ask for a skill test.  If a character has lots of time, has the tools of his trade and is in a sufficiently relaxed environment and state of mind, they complete the task to the best of their ability.  9 Chapter 2.   Skills

=== PAGE 12 ===

Example  A local noble wants an artistic piece of pottery for a grand celebration he is holding later in the month. His servant comes to the potter’s workshop, looking for the Master, who is out. The apprentice sees a chance to gain a good reputation and takes the commission. Knowing that his normal work will definitely not be up to scratch, the player decides to roll the dice in the chance that he can produce something of the standard the noble expects.  2.1.1   ⋆   Critical Successes  If the dice roll on a skill test is equal or less than the tens of the skill, then a critical success is achieved. A critical success has an outcome that far exceeds the expectation of the player when the original skill test was made. It’s the best possible result based upon the player’s original statement of intent. The actual result of a critical success during a skill test is largely up to the Gamemaster. It normally achieves one of the following results:  The task is completed sooner.  The task is completed to a higher degree of exper- tise than normal.  The task is completed with élan and style, gener- ally impressing witnesses.  The character gains additional information or in- sight into the task thanks to their brilliance. Example  When Rurik is jumping the chasm, his Athletics skill is 67%   and therefore his chance of getting a critical is 6. Rob rolls a 4, which is less than the 6% target for a critical success.   As a result, the Gamemaster rules that Rurik easily jumps the chasm with grace that allows him to carry on running without having to pause to catch his breath.  2.1.2   ⋆   Fumbles  Whenever a skill test results in a roll of 99 or 00, i.e. the two D10s both come up 0, then the player has fumbled. If the player’s skill is greater than 100% then a fumble occurs only with 00. A fumble is the worst imaginable outcome of the skill test based upon the player’s original description of what their character was planning to do when the skill test was called for. The actual result of a fumble is largely up to the Gamemaster to decide. It normally results in one of the following mishaps:  The task takes twice as long to finish and is still a failure.  The task produces a useless result that actually makes further actions more difficult.  The task fails spectacularly, opening the character up to derision and scorn from witnesses.  The character becomes impeded or even harmed by his failure. Conversely if Rob rolls 00, Rurik not only fails to make the jump over the chasm but goes plunging down the ravine head first. This need not lead to damage and the demise of the character, but they should definitly be at a disadvantage. There are specific Critical Success and Fumble results for weapon skill tests in combat and Discipline skill tests, which are described in the relevant chapters.  2.2 Bonus/Penalty Dice  Whenever circumastances make a skill roll easier or harder the player gains a Bonus or Penalty die. When a charac- ter has an Bonus die (+1B) in their roll they roll 2D10s for the tens and a D10 for the units.   You keep the best roll for the tens to see if you rolled successfully. A Penalty die (-1P) means again rolling 2D10 for the tens but you keep the worse roll. It is possible to have  10   Chapter 2.   Skills

=== PAGE 13 ===

multiple Bonus or Penalty dice, e.g. +2B, in which case you roll 3D10 for the tens and keep the best. Note, that if you get both a Bonus and a Penalty die they will cancel each other out. Example  Whilst at the Royal Court, Rurik is asked to compose a clever and stimulating poem for the hard to please Count of Malvon.   The Gamemaster asks Rurik to roll with a Penalty die.   Rurik has Performance 35% and rolls 3D10s (2D10 for the tens and a D10 for the units). He rolls 7, 5 for the tens and 1 for the units for a result of 51 which fails the test. After displeasing the Count, Rurik tries to hurdle a small wall while being pursued by the Count’s guards. The Gamemaster rules that this is an easy task, so Rurik rolls with a Bonus die. He has an Athletics skill of 60% and rolls 5, 2 for the tens and 9 for the units for a result of 29 which passes the check.  2.2.1   ⋆   Applying Bonus/Penalty dice  Bonus and Penalty dice should only be applied when they have a significant effect on the character’s chance of success. Only apply when it is important and brings something to the story. Broadly speaking, there are three areas where the Gamemaster should grant a skill Bonus or Penalty die. The three areas are:  As a result of the task being inherently easy or dif- ficult.  As a result of planning.  As a result of good roleplaying.  ▶   As a result of the task being inherently easy or difficult.  Some things are just naturally easier or harder to do than others. For example, climbing a steep cliff with natural hand holds and with the proper equipment (e.g.   ropes and iron spikes) is a normal task. Doing the same climb in the pouring rain, will introduce a Penalty die (-1P) and if the character has also forgotten his ropes and spikes then this gives two Penalty dice (-2P). In comparison, climbing a cliff where there are nu- merous ledges, and where the character can rest and actually walk up the cliff in places becomes very easy giving two Bonus dice (+2B).  ▶   As a result of planning  The Players have outlined how their characters prepares to perform a task well in advance. If their plan is a sound and good one you should make the skill test Easy. Con- versely, if the Players have given no thought as to how their characters approach a complex task which really does require preparation and planning, then make the resulting skill test Hard. Example  Several adventuring groups, in search of a lost temple, are about to enter the Badlands, a notoriously harsh wilderness where it is hard to find water and food. The Gamemaster has decided in advance to ask the players to make Natural Lore skill tests, to see how their characters fare in this unforgiving environment. Flynn’s Riders spend an extra couple of days in the city planning and preparing for the trip.   They buy more than adequate supplies and equipment, along with the extra beasts of burden to carry them. Their scholars visit the local Temple of Knowledge and beg, borrow and steal maps of the Badlands, brought back by pre- vious explorers.   Finally, they manage to track down a guide, a survivor of a previous expedition, and per- suade him to come along.   The Gamemaster awards them with two Bonus dice (+2B) to their Survival roll. The Red Hand Gang makes the traditional prepara- tions for any journey. They ensure they have enough supplies, but take no back up mounts or proper trav- eling clothing. In this case the Gamemaster asks for a normal Survival roll on account of their preparation. Alber’s Lucky Five decide to live up to their name and simply decide, as soon as they hear about the lost tem- ple, to ride out into the Badlands on the horses they arrived on, without replenishing supplies. The Game- master gives two Penalty dice (-2P) to their Survival roll as a result of their rashness.  ▶   As a result of Good Roleplaing  This usually happens for skills that involve some form of communication, like Influence.   When the Player de- scribes the action of their character, the exchange be- tween their character and the non-player character(s) being influenced may be roleplayed out.   If the player was entertaining, kept in character and added to the fun of the game, the Gamemaster may award them a  11 Chapter 2.   Skills

=== PAGE 14 ===

Bonus die (+1B) or even two Bonus dice (+2B).   In exceptional circumstances, where the player reduced ev- eryone to tears of laughter, or was outstanding in their portrayal of their character, the Gamemaster may waive the necessity for the skill test completely.   Remember good storytelling always comes before any dice rolling.  2.3 Opposed Skill Tests  Opposed skill tests are made by both characters who are in direct competition with each other.   Both char- acters make the skill tests as normal, rolling 1D100 and attempting to roll equal to or under their skill.  2.3.1   ⋆   One Character Succeeds  If one character succeeds their skill test and the other fails, then the successful character has won the opposed skill test.  2.3.2   ⋆   Both Characters Succeed  If both characters succeed then whoever rolled the high- est in their skill test wins the opposed test.   However if one character rolls a critical, while the other rolls an ordinary success, then the character that rolled the crit- ical, which is regarded as a higher level of success, wins.  2.3.3   ⋆   Both Characters Fail  Whoever rolled the lowest in their skill test wins the opposed test.   In the case of ties for both the Player wins. Example  It’s curfew in the big city and Rurik fancies going to the after hours drinking session at a local tavern. As he heads down the street towards the ale house, he sees a member of the city’s police force, the Watch, walking up the opposite side of the street. Rurik, be- ing Rurik, decides to sneak past the watchman, by creeping up the dark side of the street. The Gamemaster calls for a Deception skill test from Rurik, since this skill deals with sneaking. Rurik’s De- ception skill is only 22% as he is big, clumsy and trained as a warrior and not a thief.   Simultane- ously the Gamemaster makes a Perception skill test for the watchman.   The watchman’s Perception is 40%, because this is what he does for a living ev- ery night.   Fortunately for Rob, Rurik’s player, the Gamemaster decides that being on the shadowy side of the street significantly helps Rurik, giving him a Bonus die (+1B), which means that Rurik’s will roll 2D10 for the tens and keep the best. If Rurik rolls a 1 he gets a Critical success and manages to slip past the watchman, regardless of whether he succeeds or not. The watchman would only see Rurik if he rolled a higher Critical himself. If Rurik rolls a 7 and gets a success and the watch- man rolls 55 and fails. Rurik sneaks past him on the darkened side of the street. If Rurik rolls a 65 and fails and the watchman rolls 30 and gets a success. The watchman spots a shape in the shadows and heads over to investigate. If Rurik rolls a 15 and succeeds, as does the watchman who rolls a 9, then Rurik wins and evades him because he rolled the highest roll. The watchman thought he saw a shape in the shadows, but it’s gone so quickly that he thinks no more of it. If Rurik rolls a 65 and the watchman rolls 75, then even though both fail, Rurik wins again because he rolled the lower of the two. Although Rurik stumbled out of the shadows badly at one stage, the watchman is so lost in his own thoughts that he is completely oblivious to Rurik’s blunder. Rurik evades him.  2.4 Very High Skills  Character’s with Skills over 100% are considered Masters in their fields and under normal circumstances do not fail and quite often perform tasks that are considered impossible by normal people.  2.4.1   ⋆   Opposed Tests  In opposed skill tests a character with a skill over 100% will reduce the difference of their skill to 100 from all participants, including themselves.  12   Chapter 2.   Skills

=== PAGE 15 ===

Example  Grazum The Blackheart, an evil Orc Warlord is a Mas- ter Wrestler with an Athletics skill of 120%.   Rurik, with an Athletics skill of 60%, recklessly challenges him to an arm wrestling contest. In this opposed skill roll both skills will be reduced by 20% (100% and 40% respectively) and then apply the opposed roll normally.  2.5 Assistance  Characters will often have the opportunity to help each other during various skill tests.   If one or more charac- ters can assist and make a significant contribution then they can offer a Bonue die (+1B). On rare occasions the assistance will provide +2B (GMs discretion). The as- sisting character or characters must have the appropriate helping skill at a suitable level determined by the Game- master. How high this needs to be is usually dependant on the difficulty of the test. In most cases as long as the assisting character has a skill of at least Apprentice level (26%+) then they can help. Example  Rurik is trying to force open an old and mouldy door. If Abnon with an Athletics of 50% helps him, Rurik will roll Athletics with a Bonus die.  2.6 Skill Descriptions  This is the full list of skills in alphabetical order.  2.6.1   ⋆   Athletics ( DEX   +   ST R )  This broad skill covers a range of athletic activities useful to adventuring characters, including acrobatics, climb- ing, jumping and swimming.  Acrobatics:   This allows a character to perform a va- riety of gymnastic and balancing tasks, such as tum- bling, walking a tightrope or keeping balance on a nar- row or unstable ledge. The character can move at half their normal speed across an unstable surface without penalty. To move at a normal rate requires an Acro- batics test. A successful Acrobatics test will also halve the damage suffered from falling.  Brute Force:   Brute force is a particular application of Athletics that relies purely on power, with no finesse involved. Brute force basically involves pushing, lift- ing or dragging.  Climbing:   Given enough hand and footholds, a char- acter can climb any surface given enough time with- out the need for a test. Under normal circumstances, a character can climb or descend one quarter of their Movement per Combat Round (see Chapter 5 Combat for details). A character can double the rate of their climb or descent by making a Hard Athletics test.  Jumping:   In general, a successful Athletics test allows a character to jump up to twice their own height hor- izontally or up to half his own height vertically, as long as he has at least five metres to run first.   If they are making a standing jump these distances are halved.   For humans, average height is roughly 1.8m which gives a jumping distance of 4m.   Penalties for jumping Athletics tests are accrued by trying to jump further.   A cumulative Penalty die (-1P) is bestowed for every extra metre the character is trying to jump.  Swimming:   Characters normally swim at half their usual Movement. Athletics tests are only required when con- ditions are less than ideal – swimming while heavily encumbered or in strong currents for example.  2.6.2   ⋆   Close Combat ( DEX   +   ST R )  This skill deals with the art of hitting things and defend- ing the character with melee weapons, such as swords, clubs, spears, polearms and shields.  2.6.3   ⋆   Craft ( IN T   + 10 )  The Craft skill is actually several separate skills (such as armourer, baker, basket weaver, blacksmith, bowyer, brewer, butcher etc) grouped under a single heading which must be improved separately.   It measures the character’s ability to make and repair items. As a very rough guide it takes one day per 50 SP to produce an item. The base cost of the item, in materials needed, is 50% of the listed finished cost.  13 Chapter 2.   Skills

=== PAGE 16 ===

2.6.4   ⋆   Culture ( IN T   + 10/ IN T   )  Each Culture skill is used to provide information about the common world view of that group of people (or crea- tures).   This includes history, politics, weather cycles, geography, superstitions and popular mythology. Culture (Own) is the world view of the people that the character is born into, which is why the character gets a +10. All other foreign or alien cultures are Culture (Other).  2.6.5   ⋆   Deception ( DEX   +   IN T   )  Deception covers the arts of:  Disguise:   used to change a character’s appearance and adopt a different outward persona.  Sleight:   used to hide or take objects, without drawing undue attention.  Stealth:   used whenever a character attempts to per- sonally evade detection by another character.   This usually happens when a character either tries to move quietly past an enemy, hide from one, or performs a combination of both. These tests are opposed by the Perception skill.  2.6.6   ⋆   Dodge ( DEX   + 10 )  The Dodge skill is used to avoid incoming objects that are swung or thrown at the character. The Dodge skill is normally used when a character attempts to dodge an incoming blow in combat or a physical hazard that can be avoided, such as falling masonry.  2.6.7   ⋆   Driving ( DEX   +   IN T   )  If a character is driving a wagon, chariot or similar ve- hicle at not more than walking pace across flat terrain, a Driving skill test will never be required. Skill tests are required when a character wants to do something out of the ordinary with a vehicle, such as traverse treacherous terrain, jump obstacles and so on.  2.6.8   ⋆   Engineering ( IN T   + 10 )  This skill is used to design, build, activate, repair, sabo- tage or disassemble large mechanisms or constructs such as siege machines, city gates and drawbridges, mine- shafts, sailing ships and so forth.  2.6.9   ⋆   Healing ( IN T   + 10 )  Use of this skill without a healer’s kit incurs a two Penalty dice (-2P). Each use of the Healing skill generally takes a few minutes to perform. Both characters must remain stationary and may not use any actions while this oc- curs or they will lose the benefits of the healing. Typical types of injuries or ailments that may be treated are listed below:  Unconsciousness   A successful Healing test can revive a character from unconsciousness, though drugged pa- tients may inflict a penalty on the Healing test.  Minor Injury   A successful Healing test on a Minor In- jury will heal 1D4 Hit Points.  Stabilise Major Wound   A successful Healing test on a Major Wound will not restore the lost Hit Points. This Healing merely stabilises the patient enough so that they will not die of blood loss.  Curing Diseases   A successful Healing test allows a dis- eased patient to add a bonus to his next opposed test of Resilience versus disease Potency to resist the dis- ease. The bonus is equal to the healer’s Healing skill divided by 10 (the critical success range).  Curing Poisons   A successful Healing test allows a poi- soned patient to attempt a second opposed test of Re- silience versus poison Potency.   The patient gains a bonus to their Resilience skill equal to the healer’s Healing skill divided by 10 (the critical success range).  Surgery   Other than magical healing, successful Surgery is the only way that a character can recover from a Ma- jor Wound.   Once a successful Healing test has been made to quench the bleeding of a Major Wound, a suc- cessful Healing test can attempt to set broken bones, stitch together rent flesh and restore the wound loca- tion so that it is on the road to recovery.   As long as the Healing test is a success, the stricken character gains one hit point and will begin to heal as normal. The use of Healing requires suitable medical equip- ment such as bandages or salves or appropriate impro- vised alternatives.  14   Chapter 2.   Skills

=== PAGE 17 ===

2.6.10   ⋆   Influence ( CHA   + 10 )  This is the art of verbally persuading another character to do what you want.   Characters can use both logical and/or emotional arguments.   If successful in an op- posed skill test, the character’s audience is temporarily swayed in favour of the character’s argument.   In time they may understand that they were fast talked, bam- boozled or hoodwinked and their judgement clouded, but in the short term they go along with what the charac- ter suggests.   Influence can never be used to get a char- acter to act against their instinct for self-preservation. Influence skill tests are normally opposed by a Per- ception, Persistence or Influence skill. They may be fur- ther influenced by how well a player roleplays the ex- change. Influence tests are either applied to individuals, where each character rolls individually against the Influencer, or against crowds, were one roll is made to resist based upon an average Persistence for the entire crowd.  2.6.11   ⋆   Language ( IN T   + 50/ IN T   )  The Language skill is a separate skill for each language the character knows. Their native language gets a +50%. Every character with a Language skill of 50% or more is fluent in that language, although they are likely to have an accent if it is not their native language.  2.6.12   ⋆   Lore ( IN T   )  The Lore skill is actually an umbrella term for several different skills, each of which must be improved sepa- rately. Each Lore skill defines an area of knowledge for the character and skill tests are made whenever a player wants to see if their character knows something about the subject at hand. Possible Lores is only limited by a player’s imagina- tion.   A list of potential study areas of Lore is listed here:   alchemy, art, astronomy, gambling, geography, heraldry, law, logistics, military tactics, philosophy, poi- sons.  2.6.13   ⋆   Mechanisms ( DEX   +   IN T   )  Usually, a character will simply make a Mechanisms test in order to succeed at assembling or disassembling a de- vice, with appropriate bonuses or penalties decided upon by the Gamemaster.   If a device has been designed to specifically resist attempts at disassembly, the Mecha- nisms test becomes opposed by the Mechanisms skill of the character that created it. Mechanisms is also used for picking a lock or disas- sembling a trap. This usually takes at least one minute (12 Combat Rounds) to perform, whereas larger or par- ticularly complex devices will take longer.  2.6.14   ⋆   Natural Lore ( IN T   + 10 )  Broadly speaking this Lore deals with the character’s knowledge of the natural world.   It covers several spe- cialist areas.  Animal:   This covers the ability to recognise an animal, know its feeding habits, breeding cycle, habitats and so on.   A character with a skill of at least 50% may try to domesticate a wild animal, making a skill test after every full week of training. If the character also has a Riding skill of at least 50% and the animal is capable of being ridden, they may train the animal to ride during this period. The character may later train the animal not to panic in battle and to strike at his enemies. This takes a further period of training, with the character making a skill test at the end of each week to succeed.  Plant:   A character can identify plants in the wild, dis- cover good places to grow crops, decide which plants are edible and what unusual properties they may pos- sess.  Mineral:   This skill allows the character to detect pre- cious metals and stones, detect fault lines and other dangerous features in the rock.  Survival:   One Survival test will be required every day that a character lacks either food, water or a safe place to sleep.   Success indicates the character manages to find whatever they are lacking – failure means they will go without which, over several days, could result in very serious consequences.   Survival tests are not used when the character is in a city or town.  Tracking   A character can track in the wilderness and is able to locate the tracks of a specific creature and fol- low them. A test must be made to locate the trail and then again every ten minutes they are being followed.  Weather:   The character can predict basic changes in the weather.  2.6.15   ⋆   Perception ( IN T   +   P OW   )  The Perception skill is used to represent the five senses of the character when detecting objects or other characters. For example, a common use of the Perception skill is as a straight skill test to detect hidden objects in a room, or as an opposed test to detect a hidden character.  15 Chapter 2.   Skills

=== PAGE 18 ===

2.6.16   ⋆   Performance ( CHA   + 10 )  A successful test with this skill will result in the au- dience or partner being pleased by the character’s per- formance.   This skill covers acting, composing poetry, dancing, singing, readings and playing an instrument.  2.6.17   ⋆   Persistence ( P OW   + 10 )  Persistence represents a character’s mental willpower. It is used to resist the effects of magic and often against another character’s attempt to use the Influence skill against them.  2.6.18   ⋆   Ranged Combat ( DEX   +   IN T   )  This skill covers the use of missile weapons, such as bows, crossbows, thrown spears and thrown daggers. It is cov- ered in more detail in the Combat chapter.  2.6.19   ⋆   Resilience ( CON   +   P OW   )  This is a measure of how physically tough a character is.   The higher a character’s Resilience, the more likely they are to handle adverse physical conditions, such as weathering a vicious sandstorm, surviving in a drought, or overcoming the effects of poison or disease.  2.6.20   ⋆   Riding ( DEX   +   P OW   )  If a character is riding a creature with the help of saddle and stirrups, at not more than a walking pace across flat terrain, then a Riding test will never be required. Tests are required when a character wants to do something out of the ordinary with a mount – such as traverse treach- erous terrain, jump obstacles, ride bareback and so on.  2.6.21   ⋆   Sailing ( DEX   +   IN T   )  This covers small water-borne craft propelled manually by oars or paddles, commonly known as boats, and larger craft   powered by sail or rows of oars. Travelling across calm water does not usually require a skill test but ad- verse conditions such as currents and weather can bestow penalties.  2.6.22   ⋆   Streetwise ( CHA   +   P OW   )  Streetwise allows a character to find fences for stolen goods, black markets and general information. Such uses of Streetwise normally require a minimum of 1D4 hours. Streetwise also covers following people down crowded city streets without them being noticed.  2.6.23   ⋆   Trade ( IN T   + 10 )  This skill is primarily used when characters trade, barter or otherwise negotiate over the sale of goods.   In such transactions a successful Opposed Test using the Trade of the buyer versus the Trade of the seller is needed for the buyer to get the best deal.   If the buyer wins they get a discount; -10% for a success, -20% for a critical. If the seller wins they can sell the item for more; +10% for a success and +20% for a critical.   If the opponent fumbles their roll, double the increase or decrease. The Trade skill also enables the character to deter- mine the value placed on something by others; estimat- ing its market value.   Particularly common or obscure objects might give a bonus or penalty to the skill test. Success will allow a character to guess the average mon- etary value of the object, normally guessing accurately to within 10% of its actual value.  2.6.24   ⋆   Unarmed Combat ( DEX   +   ST R )  This skill covers the use of natural attacks. For humans this is punching and kicking (1D3 damage) as well as grappling.   Non-human characters may also have bite, horns, claw and tail attacks.  16   Chapter 2.   Skills

=== PAGE 19 ===

CHAPTER 3  Equipment  Fantasy roleplaying games can be thought of as a form of cooperative improvised theatre. You could think of the players as the actors and the Gamemaster as the director and production team providing the stage and scenery, a huge big budget supporting cast and every prop that the actors could possibly need.   This chap- ter deals with the props, the equipment that the player characters will be using.  3.1 In-game Economics  These rules do not provide details for trading and fan- tasy world economics. Although dry economic markets are unlikely to feature heavily in adventure stories, the exploits of daring and wily merchant adventurers are.  3.1.1   ⋆   Availability of Goods  The equipment lists serve as ‘game tools’ to allow players to quickly and easily buy equipment for their characters. The range of goods listed at the quoted prices is only going to be available in a large metropolis with organised markets and districts given over to shops and mercantile activity. In less prosperous cities and towns there is a smaller range available, sometimes at higher costs. In rural ar- eas, only local produce and a small amount of locally crafted goods can be bought at a reasonable price. There might be oddities to this model and these can lead to further adventure. Example  A village without an armourer has a large cache of old armour and weapons for sale at a good price.   This is because a local monster living in a nearby cave has been ambushing and killing adventurers for years and then trading their equipment to the villagers. In turn, the villagers oblige by sending a steady stream of fresh and inexperienced adventurers, such as the recently arrived player characters, to its lair.  3.1.2   ⋆   Barter  Coins are the main exchange method for the landed no- bility and rich merchants. Barter is the main method of exchanging goods for people outside of the main urban areas. In such transactions successful Opposed Test us- ing the Trade of the buyer versus the Trade of the seller are needed for the buyer to get the best deal.  3.1.3   ⋆   Consequences  The main thing to remember is that with any item of equipment there are consequences in their use as well as benefits.   The most obvious consequence is encum- brance. A heavily armoured and equipped character will be slowed, unable to use skills as effectively and will be- come fatigued more easily. A less obvious effect is that an obviously well equipped character becomes a target for both minor and major theft. From the opportunistic thief who desires the PC’s new sword to the more organised bandit group who tar- gets the party because they believe that they have a stash of treasure back at their base because of all the flashy new equipment they are wearing. There might also be social consequences. In civilised towns and cities, prominent displays of arms and armour may unsettle and upset the locals and bring about the unwanted attention of the Watch who want to make sure that the characters are not violent troublemakers.   In some more draconian fantasy lands there may even be laws and social codes that dictate what arms and armour a citizen may own and in what situations they may carry it.  3.1.4   ⋆   Currency  Coins are usually created in mints tightly controlled by the local nobility, appointed by the local ruler, whose head appears on one side of the coin. Other sources of coin are usually the treasure troves of monsters, whose assets are brought into the economy by enterprising ad- venturers. Currency can be based upon whatever is valued by the culture using it. Being a fantasy game, many vari- ant systems of currency can be created. For example, a system that uses the teeth of slain dragons or magical gemstones enchanted with minor magic that is useful in everyday life can be used as an exchange mechanism. For ease of use here’s a simple coin based currency that will be used throughout the rest of this book to give value to an item.  10 Copper Pieces (CP) = 1 Silver Piece (SP) 10 Silver Pieces (SP) = 1 Gold Piece (GP)  17  Chapter 3.   Equipment

=== PAGE 20 ===

3.2 The Equipment Lists  The rest of this chapter is given over to equipment lists. These lists provide the cost of the item and detail any game effects.   They also give an Encumbrance value (ENC) for the item in question.   This is a value which rates both the weight and how physically unwieldy an item is.   This is for the Encumbrance rules given on page 80.  3.3 Close Combat Weapons  All Close Combat weapons use the Close Combat skill. Each close combat weapon is characterised by the fol- lowing qualities:  Type:   This shows how the weapon is wielded and other special rules (see Close Combat Weapon Types on page 18).  Damage Dice:   The damage the weapon deals on a suc- cessful attack.  STR/DEX:   The minimum STR and DEX scores needed to easily wield this weapon. If either of the Character- istics are below these minimums, a Penalty die (-1P) is applied to a character’s skill when attacking and parrying with this weapon.  ENC:   The weapon’s Encumbrance.   The weight and bulk of the weapon.  Size:   Weapons are rated in the following size categories: Light, Medium, Heavy and Huge. Weapons need to be of the same category or larger to block all damage. If the defending weapon is one category less they block half damage. If two categories less they cannot block the damage.  Cost:   The cost in silver pieces to purchase this weapon.  ▶   Close Combat Weapon Types  1H:   This weapon must be used one-handed.  2H:   This weapon must be used two-handed.  Flex:   This weapon can be used two-handed.   When used in two hands, it gains +2 damage and can be used by someone with a STR 2 less than that listed.  Set:   This weapon may be set against a charge.   The wielder must state, however, at the start of combat how it is being wielded and must take a Change Stance action to alter its usage.  Range:   This weapon suffers no penalty when thrown. Note that improvised and primitive weapons: such as a stone hatchet, stone spear or a convenient log picked up and used as a club, do the same damage as the base weapon -1.  3.4 Ranged Weapons  Each ranged weapon is characterised by the following qualities:  Type:   This shows how the weapon is wielded and other special rules (see Ranged Combat Weapon Types on page 18).  Damage Dice:   The damage the weapon deals on a suc- cessful attack.  Range:   This is the effective range of the weapon. A tar- get within the weapon’s range may be attacked with- out penalty.   A target within double the weapon’s range may be attacked, but the attacker rolls with two Penalty dice (-2P). Attacks against targets be- yond double the weapon’s range automatically fail.  STR/DEX:   The minimum STR and DEX scores re- quired to easily wield this weapon.   If either of the Characteristics are below these minimums, a Penalty die (-1P) is applied to a character’s roll when attack- ing and parrying with this weapon.  ENC:   The weapon’s Encumbrance.   The weight and bulk of the weapon.  Cost:   The cost in silver pieces to purchase this weapon.  ▶   Ranged Combat Weapon Types  1H:   This weapon must be used one-handed.  2H:   This weapon must be used two-handed.   A small shield (e.g.   buckler) can be strapped to the forearm but cannot be used whilst wielding or shooting this weapon.  Close:   This weapon suffers no penalty when used in Close Combat.  Range:   This weapon suffers no penalty at this distance.  18   Chapter 3.   Equipment

=== PAGE 21 ===

Weapon   Type   Damage Dice   STR/DEX   ENC   Size   Cost  Arming Sword   1H   1D8   9/9   2   Medium   150 SP Ball and Chain   1H   1D8   9/9   2   Medium   120 SP Battleaxe   1H   1D8   9/9   2   Medium   120 SP Club   Flex   1D6   5/9   1   Light   20 SP Dagger   1H/Range   1D4+1   -/-   -   Light   20 SP Great Axe   2H   2D8   13/5   4   Heavy   200 SP Great Hammer   2H   2D8   13/5   4   Heavy   200 SP Greatsword   2H   2D8   13/9   4   Heavy   300 SP Hatchet   1H/Range   1D6   5/9   1   Light   20 SP Lance   Flex/Set   1D10   11/9   3   Heavy   150 SP Longspear   2H/Set   1D8+1   9/5   2   Medium   30 SP Longsword   Flex   1D8   13/11   2   Medium   250 SP Mace   Flex   1D8   9/9   2   Medium   120 SP Military Flail   2H   2D8   13/5   4   Heavy   200 SP Polearm   2H/Set   1D8   9/9   3   Heavy   200 SP Quarterstaff   2H   1D8   5/9   2   Medium   20 SP Scimitar   1H   1D8   9/9   2   Medium   150 SP Shield (small)   -   1D4   -/-   1   Medium   50 SP Shield (medium)   -   1D6   9/-   2   Heavy   150 SP Shield (large)   -   1D6   13/-   3   Huge   300 SP Shortspear   Flex/Set/Range   1D6   5/5   2   Medium   20 SP Shortsword   1H   1D6   5/5   1   Medium   100 SP Unarmed   -   1D3   -/-   -   -   - War Hammer   1H   1D8   9/9   2   Medium   120 SP  Table 3.1: Close Combat Weapons  ▶   Using Ranged Weapons in Close Combat  If used in close combat, a ranged weapon is treated as an improvised weapon, doing damage equal to its closest hand-to-hand equivalent if that is less than its ranged weapon damage.  3.5 Armour  Each piece of armour is characterised by the following qualities:  AP:   How many armour points this type of armour pro- vides.   In case you need variable armour values use the value in parenthesis (usefull, if the averages give no chance of damaging).  ENC:   The armour’s Encumbrance.   The weight and bulk of the armour. The character’s base Combat Or- der is reduced by the ENC value of the armour.  Cost:   The cost in silver pieces to purchase this armour.  ▶   Armour Descriptions  Leather:   Either padded leather or boiled and stiffened leather or linen armour.  Ringmail:   Metal rings sown onto a padded leather suit.  Scalemail:   Metal scales sown onto a padded leather suit.  Chainmail:   Links of chain made into a suit.  Platemail:   Steel plates that cover the body,   over a chain mail backing.  19  Chapter 3.   Equipment

=== PAGE 22 ===

Weapon   Type   Damage Dice   Range   STR/DEX   ENC   Cost  Dagger   Close   1D4+1   STR x m   -/9   -   30 SP Crossbow (Heavy) 1   2H   2D6   150m   9/9   2   350 SP Dart   1D3   STR x m   -/9   -   15 SP Crossbow (Light) 1   2H   1D8   125m   5/9   1   150 SP Hatchet   Close   1D6   STR x m   -/9   1   25 SP Improvised (Rock)   1d4   STR x m   5/5   1   - Javelin   1d6   STR x 2m   5/9   1   20 SP Longbow   2H   1d10   150m   13/9   1   150 SP Shortbow   2H   1d8   75m   9/9   1   75 SP Shortspear   Close   1d6   STR x 2m   5/9   2   20 SP Sling   1H   1d6   50m   -/9   -   5 SP Whip   Close   1d3   5m   -/9   -   50 SP 1. To reload a heavy crossbow requires a full combat round while a light crossbow requires both movement action and reaction (see Combat Chapter for details).  Table 3.2: Ranged Combat Weapons  Ammunition   ENC   Cost  Arrows (10)   -   1 SP Blowgun darts (10)   -   2 SP Crossbow bolts (10)   -   2 SP Sling bullets (10)   -   5 CP  Table 3.3: Ranged Weapon Ammunition  Armour   AP   ENC   Cost  Leather   2 (1D3)   3   500 SP Ringmail   3 (1D4)   4   1000 SP Scalemail   4 (1D6)   6   1500 SP Chainmail   5 (2D4)   7   3000 SP Platemail   6 (2D6)   9   9000 SP  Table 3.4: Armours  ▶   Effects of SIZ on Armour  Armour made for a character of SIZ 1 to 5 will have its cost and ENC halved from that shown on table 3.4. Characters of SIZ 21 or higher will double the cost and ENC for armour made for them. Also note that:  Characters may try using plate armour not de- signed for them but the ENC will be doubled.  Characters may not wear more than one type of armour, i.e. layer armour, to get increased Armour Points.  3.6 General Items  Backpack:   It can hold 20 ENC of equipment.  Block & Tackle:   Adds a Bonus die (+1B) to Mecha- nisms tests to make or disarm large traps and makes Engineering tests possible in some circumstances.   It requires at least 10m of rope to function.  Candle, 1 Hour:   A candle illuminates a one metre radius.   Any wind stronger than a slight breeze will extinguish a candle.  Climbing Kit:   A climbing kit provides a Bonus die (+1B) to any Athletics skill tests made to climb.  Crowbar:   Adds a Bonus die (+1B) to brute force Ath- letics tests. If used as a weapon, it is considered a club (wielded with a Penalty die -1P).  Healing Kit:   A healing kit is good for five uses (whether the skill test succeeds or fails).  20   Chapter 3.   Equipment

=== PAGE 23 ===

Item   ENC   Cost  Backpack   1   5 SP Bedroll   1   1 SP Block & Tackle   1   15 SP Bottle, glass   -   2 SP Candle, 1 hour   -   1 CP Chain, 2 metres   2   40 SP Climbing Kit   1   25 SP Craft Tools   2   75 SP Crowbar   1   25 SP Healing Kit   -   25 SP Fish Hook   -   1 CP Fishing Kit   1   15 SP Flint & Tinder   -   5 CP Grappling Hook   -   5 SP Hammer   -   1 SP Ladder, 3 metres   4   2 SP Lantern   1   10 SP Lock Picks   -   75 SP Mining Pick   1   35 SP Musical   Instru- ment 2   70 SP Oil, Flask   1   1 SP Papyrus, Sheet   -   1 SP Quiver   -   2 SP Rope, 10 metres   2   10 SP Sack, Large   1   5 CP Sack, Small   -   2 CP Scythe   2   30 SP Slingbag   1   5 CP Spade   1   25 SP Torch   -   4 CP Waterskin   1   5 CP Writing Kit   1   45 SP  Table 3.5: General Items  Fish Hook:   This item allows a character to use his Natural Lore skill to catch a fish without suffering a penalty on the test.  Fishing Kit:   The fishing kit grants a character a Bonus die (+1B) to his Natural Lore test to catch fish.  Flint & Tinder:   A character with flint and tinder can build a fire in one minute under normal conditions without having to roll his Natural Lore skill.  Grappling Hook:   It will support the weight of 50 ENC or 50 SIZ, or any combination thereof.  Hammer:   If used as a weapon, it is treated as a club (wielded with a Penalty die -1P). Hammers may be used on inanimate objects without being destroyed.  Lantern:   A lantern provides clear illumination out to a three metre radius. It will burn for two hours on a flask of oil.  Lock Picks:   Adds a Bonus die (+1B) to Mechanisms tests to unlock a locking device.  Mining Pick:   If used as a weapon, it is considered a club (wielded with a Penalty die -1P). Mining picks may be used on inanimate objects without being de- stroyed.  Oil, Flask:   A flask of oil is enough to fuel a lantern for two hours or, if broken on the ground and ignited, enough to sustain a small fire for one minute.  Quiver:   Quivers can hold up to 30 arrows or crossbow bolts.  Rope, 10 Metres:   A standard rope can support the weight of 50 ENC or 50 SIZ, or any combination thereof.  Sack, Large:   Able to hold 10 ENC of equipment.  Sack, Small:   A small sack can hold 5 ENC of equip- ment.  Scythe:   If used as a weapon, it is considered a polearm (wielded with a Penalty die -1P).  Slingbag:   It can carry 15 ENC of equipment.  Spade:   If used as a weapon, it is considered a club (wielded with a Penalty die -1P).  Torch, 1 Hour:   It will burn for one hour. A torch il- luminates a three metre radius. If used as a weapon, it is considered a club (wielded with a Penalty die - 1P), except that it does not inflict normal damage – instead, it inflicts 1D4 fire damage and a fumble or critical hit will also extinguish the brand.  Waterskin:   A waterskin can hold enough water to sus- tain an adventurer for two days.  21  Chapter 3.   Equipment

=== PAGE 24 ===

3.7 Transportation  Some example prices for trading animals as well as trans- portation services can be found in the following table.  Animal   Cost  Bison   200 SP Bull   250 SP Cart   75 SP Cat   2 SP Chariot   600 SP Cow   150 SP Dog, Domestic   2 SP Dog, Hunting   25 SP Fowl   1 SP Goat   50 SP Hawk   400 SP Horse, Draft   400 SP Horse, Riding   350 SP Horse, Combat Trained   500 SP Mule   125 SP Ox   200 SP Pig   50 SP Saddle and Bridle   75 SP Sheep   30 SP Travel (by Post-Horse)   2 SP per kilometre Travel (by Ship)   1 SP per kilometre Travel (by Wagon)   5 SP per kilometre Wagon   300 SP  Table 3.6: Animals and Transportation  3.8 Food & Lodging  Some example prices for food and lodging can be found in the following table.  Animal   Cost  Lodging, Poor   2 CP Lodging, Average   1 SP Lodging, Superior   5 SP Food and Drink, Poor, 1 Day   1 CP Food and Drink, Average, 1 Day   5 CP Food and Drink, Superior, 1 Day   2 SP Trail Rations, 1 Day   5 CP  Table 3.7: Food and Lodging  22   Chapter 3.   Equipment

=== PAGE 25 ===

CHAPTER 4  Combat  Fantasy Crux is a swords and sorcery game and, as such, swords will be drawn during epic adventures with the aim of spilling blood. Be it for glory, honour, fame or riches, when all else fails violence is the means of achieving these goals. The characters come from worlds that are rife with conflict, where warriors are required to wage wars against evil neighbours, wandering bandits and foul monsters that come out of the wilderness. It should be remembered that Fantasy Crux is not a game purely about combat, just as it is not purely about magic. It would not be unusual for whole sessions to pass without any physical violence. However, in time, characters will get involved in dangerous life threatening fights. This chapter provides you with a straightforward and direct system for playing out action packed and deadly combat.  4.1 Combat is Tough  Characters that have weapon skills less than 100% are at the whim of the dice to determine whether or not they land a blow in combat. Anything you do to increase your character’s chances to hit, or hit first, will stand in your favour and make the outcome more certain. Once you are hit in combat, things start getting messy.   Your character has a relatively low number of hit points. In a couple of blows, or one lucky blow, these hit points can easily be reduced to zero, which indicates that the character has died.   Make sure your character can dodge, parry or has magical protection. With Major Wounds your character is especially at risk of grievous and permanent harm every time they decide to use vio- lence to solve a problem. Numbers count.   If you are facing off against mul- tiple opponents, even weak and unskilled ones, you are quickly going to run out of attacks and reactions.   In practical terms this means that your character may, at best, reduce the number of attackers by one per round, while only being able to protect themselves against one of several incoming attacks. Even Masters are vulnerable.   A weapon skill over 100% is no guarantee of survival, as characters can be brought low by a lucky critical hit, or by an opponent who has lured them into an ambush and stacked the odds against them through surprise and careful planning. These harsh realities mean that players tend to avoid combats where they do not have a very good chance to win. Instead of wading into masses of weaker opponents,  hoping that lucky dice rolls will see them through, they carefully plan ambushes, where they have the benefit of terrain and supporting soldiers from the local militia that will allow them to wipe out the majority of the enemy before the first proper round of combat. They will use any of their Powers to boost their damage, chances to hit, or armour and in general try to get an advantage.  4.2 Summary of Combat  Work out encounter distance:   The Gamemaster de- termines how far away the hostile group is to the player characters, either at Range or Close.  Start Combat time:   Combat is divided into rounds. A single round has a duration of five seconds of time, giving 12 rounds in every minute. During a round ev- ery character can perform one action. Combat rounds cycle through the following steps:  Determine Order: At the start of every combat each character rolls 1D10 and adds it to their Combat Order. The higher the result the earliest the character acts.  Characters Take Actions & Reaction: In a com- bat round each character gets one Combat Ac- tion, one Movement Action and one Reaction.  23 Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 26 ===

Combat Actions, such as attacks, and Movement Actions take place in Combat Order. The charac- ter with the highest order will act first, followed by the character with the second-highest order, and so on until the character with the lowest or- der acts.   Reactions, such as parries, dodges or opportunity attacks, are made during this pro- cess as they are needed.  End of Combat Round: Once all eligible charac- ters have acted in the combat round, it is over. If there are characters still engaged in combat with enemies, another combat round begins. Example  For example: Lura has DEX 15 and INT 14.   She is wearing leather armour so has Combat Order 13 (15 minus 2). She rolls a 7 in her 1D10 for a total of 20 Combat Order.   An unarmoured Goblin has DEX 13 and INT 10 and rolled a 4 for a total of 16. Thus the Combat Order is Lura acting before the Goblin.  4.3 Encounter Distance  Not all combats start with the two sides, the players and their opponents, directly facing each other within swords reach.   At the beginning of a combat, or potential com- bat, the Gamemaster must determine which of the two distances the encounter starts at. Close is a range of two metres or less and is the dis- tance at which a character can engage in either Close or Unarmed combat. Ranged, beyond two metres up to double the range of the missile weapon a character is holding, is the dis- tance at which the character can engage in ranged com- bat. Ranged combat typically happens out in the open countryside where groups of combatants can see each over coming over the horizon or emerging in the distance from old ruined buildings.  4.3.1   ⋆   Some Basic Rules  A Combat Round lasts five seconds.  You get one Combat Action, usually an attack, one Movement Action and one Reaction, usually a defensive action, per combat round.  You can move your Movement Rate in a Combat Round without losing your Action or Reaction.  You can run twice your Movement Rate in a Com- bat Round but you may only Dodge as your Reac- tion.  To attack you roll against your Close Combat, Ranged Combat or Unarmed Combat skill depending on the type of weapon you are using.  When attacked you can either Parry (use the Close Combat or Unarmed skill) or Dodge as a Reaction.  If your character successfully Dodges an attack they take no damage.  If your opponent successfully Parries your attack their weapon or shield reduces the damage your attack does.  If you successfully hit, your opponent takes dam- age to their hit points equal to Weapon Damage rolled + your Damage Modifier - Opponent’s Ar- mour Points  4.4 Combat Actions  The actions a character may take when it is his turn to act are detailed here. A character can only choose one of the options below each round.  4.4.1   ⋆   Close Combat Actions  Charge:   If a character can move a minimum of five metres towards his opponent, then he can make a charge. He may move a distance up to - but no more than - twice his Movement Rate.   This must be in a straight line and he must end up adjacent to an enemy. When the move is complete, a close combat attack may be made against the enemy. If the attack is suc- cessful, the character gains a bonus of +1D6 damage. He loses his reaction for the round that he charges on. Characters may not charge uphill and gain the damage modifier.  Close Combat Attack:   The character can make a sin- gle close combat attack.   In addition to the normal attack, there are the following special attacks.  24   Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 27 ===

All out Attack: The attacker gives up their Re- action for the round but gains a second attack, which happens straight after the first attack. Both attacks are rolled with a Penalty die (-1P) due to the loss of skill during this frenzied attack. This type of attack cannot be combined with any other special attack.  Great Attack: This attack is made using swords, axes or maces where the attacker has enough room to wind up the weapon for a really forceful blow. The attacker rolls with a Bonus die (+1B) to attack and automatically does the maximum damage modifier value but loses his reaction for that combat round.  Disarming Attack: Attacker rolls with a Penalty die (-1P) to his weapon skill with the aim of dis- arming their opponent either of their weapon or shield.   If the attack is successful and the op- ponent fails to parry or dodge, the weapon or shield is thrown 1D6 metres away from the owner. Larger opponents will have a Bonus die (+1B) or more to their skill roll for this test.  Trip Attack: Attacker rolls with a Penalty die (- 1P) to his weapon skill with the aim of tripping their opponent. If the attack is successful and the opponent fails to parry or dodge, he falls prone. Quadruped opponents or larger opponents will have a Bonus die (+1B) or more to their roll for this test.  Knockout Attack: Attacker rolls with a Penalty die (-1P) to his weapon skill with the aim of knocking out their opponent. If the attack is suc- cessful and the opponent fails to parry or dodge, and the damage done is equal to a major wound then the opponent is knocked out without suf- fering any damage.   If the damage is equal to a minor wound the opponent takes the minimum damage of the weapon but is not knocked out.  Knock-Back Attack: Requires a successful shield attack (with a Penalty die (-1P) on the roll if in off-hand).   If the opponent fails to parry or dodge he takes no damage but is knocked-back 2 metres.   Larger opponents will have a Bonus die (+1B) or more to their roll. If the opponent fails they need to make an Athletics roll with a Penalty die (-1P) or also fall prone.  Intimidate/Persuade:   The character tries to get the other side to surrender or flee. This can either be tar- geted at a single enemy or a group.   Do an Opposed roll using the character’s Influence vs.   the enemies’ Persistence, applying the roll as listed below. Groups roll once using the Persistence of the group leader. If the group leader’s Influence skill is higher than his Persistence, then they may use that skill instead. Ap- ply the following Bonus/Penalty dice to the enemy’s  25 Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 28 ===

skill rolls depending on the state of the enemy.  two Bonus dice (+2B)   if the enemy is still at full strength, or has only taken some minor wounds. Bonus die (+1B)   if the enemy out numbers the player’s side, but have had   at   least   20%   losses either   in   numbers   or   hit points. Penalty die (-1P)   if the enemy is fewer than the   player’s   side   and   has taken some wounds. two Penalty dice (-2P)   if   the   enemy   has   taken more than half hit points in wounds and/or has seen half his group incapacitated by the players. Note: these modifiers are not cumulative. Apply the one that best describes the situation.  If the enemy is at full strength and/or outnumbers the player characters then only a critical roll for Influence vs a failed Persistence roll will make them surrender. A fumbled Persistence roll will see the enemy suddenly rout. When the player is attempting the roll they must de- clare whether they are targeting the whole group or singling out an individual. The Gamemaster has the final say on who is targeted and if the attempt is pos- sible at all. Example  Rurik is fighting a group of four goblins, one of whom he has already badly wounded while the other three are still at full hit points. If he decides to single out the wounded Goblin, then the Goblin’s Persistence roll to resist Rurik’s taunt- ing and the resultant urge to flee will be rolled with a Penalty die (-1P). If he decides to target the whole group, which as a whole is undamaged and outnum- bers him, then the Goblins will roll with a Bonus die (+1B) to their Persistence.  The character need not speak the same language as the opponent they are trying to Influence, but they must be capable of some sort of sign, gesture or body language that the opponent is capable of understand- ing.  Set Weapon:   A character can spend their Action set- ting the shaft of a weapon, such as a spear or polearm, in the ground in anticipation of a charge from an op- ponent. When the charge actually comes the charac- ter automatically gets an attack roll with a Bonus die (+1B) before the charging character gets their attack. If the character makes any other action or reaction before the charge, the weapon becomes ‘unset’.  Situation   Skill Modifier  Target is helpless   Automatic Critical Target is prone or attacked from behind (flanked) +1B Attacking or defending while on higher ground or on mount (unless wielding a weapon two size cate- gories smaller) +1B Attacking or defending while prone   -1P Attacking or defending while on unstable ground -1P Attacking or defending while un- derwater -2P Defending while on lower ground or   against   mounted   foe   (unless wielding a weapon two size cate- gories larger) -1P Fighting in partial darkness   -1P Fighting in darkness   -2P Fighting in pitch dark or blinded   -3P  Table 4.1:   Close Combat Situational Bonus/Penalty Dice  ▶   Making Close Combat Attacks  Making the Attack: To attack, the player simply rolls D100 and compares it to the character’s Close Combat skill which may be rolled with Bonus/Penalty dice for specific situations or special attacks. If a character rolls equal to or lower than his Weapon skill, he has hit his target.   If a character rolls greater than his Weapon skill, he has missed his target.  Target Reaction: If the enemy has already reacted this round, or chooses not to React against this at- tack, then this attack is unopposed. Move straight on to Damage Resolution. If the attack is opposed, the defender makes a Dodge or Parry (see below).  Damage Resolution:   If the attack is successful, damage is rolled. Each weapon has its own Dam- age score, to which the attacker’s Damage Modifier is added in order to determine the total damage being dealt. If the defender is armoured then the armour will absorb some of this damage. Reduce the attack’s damage by the armour points (AP) of the defender’s armour.  Damage Application: Apply any remaining dam- age to the defender’s hit points.  4.4.2   ⋆   Unarmed Combat Actions  The following are potential actions:  Unarmed Combat Attack:   The character can make a single Unarmed Combat Attack.  26   Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 29 ===

Attacker   Defender’s Reaction   Result  Fumble   No need to roll   Attacker fumbles. Failure   No need to roll   Attacker fails to hit defender. Success   Fumble   Attacker hits, defender takes damage rolled minus armour points and fumbles. Success   Failure   Attacker hits, defender takes damage rolled minus armour points. Success   Success   If dodging defender avoids the attack. If parrying then if attacker’s weapon smaller or equal in size to defender’s weapon all damage avoided. If parrying weapon is a rank smaller half damage, if two ranks smaller then no damage can be avoided. Success   Critical   Defender avoids attack and takes no damage. If parrying the weapon size penalty does not come into it. Critical   Fumble   Attacker does two of: maximum damage, ignore armour, trip, disarm, knock-back, knockout, free attack. Defender fumbles. Critical   Failure   Attacker does two of: maximum damage, ignore armour, trip, disarm, knock-back, knockout, free attack. Critical   Success   Similar to Success:Failure above. Critical   Critical   Similar to Success:Success above.  Table 4.2: Summary of Combat Results  Natural Weapon attack:   Using the characters’s nat- ural weapons be it claw, bite, kick or fist.  Grapple Attack:   The attacker attempts to grab an opponent and an opposed Unarmed Combat Attack is made. If the attacker wins they may choose to in- flict pain, immobilise or throw their opponent.  ▶   Making Unarmed Combat Attacks  Roll against Unarmed Combat skill to determine if the attack is successful. If an Unarmed Attack is parried by a crafted or natural weapon, then the attacker will imme- diately suffer the rolled damage of the parrying weapon, with no damage modifier. This is in addition to the nor- mal effect of the parry.  ▶   Natural Weapons  Natural Weapons such as the teeth and claws of monsters are counted as weapons and not Unarmed Attacks. The damage they deal is listed in the monster’s description. They may parry other Natural Weapons or Unarmed Attacks, but not crafted weapon attacks.  ▶   Damage Modifier  Damage Modifier is applied normally to Unarmed Com- bat.  ▶   Grappling  Grapple Attack is made in the same way as a normal Unarmed or Natural Weapon attack but must be de- clared as such before any dice are rolled. Should the at- tacker hit with his grapple attack, no damage is initially caused. Instead, the attacker then opposes his Unarmed Combat Skill to the target’s Unarmed Combat Skill, in a roll similar to an opposed skill test:  Grapple Fails: The grapple attempt fails and the attack is considered to have missed.  Grapple Succeeds:   The two combatants are now grappling and the attacker may immediately follow up on this success by Throwing, Inflicting pain, Disarm or Immobilise the target.  Break Free:   To break out of a grapple, the character makes an opposed Grapple Attack.   The characters may only use the Unarmed Combat Skill in this case. If the character succeeds they managed to break free and the combatants are no longer grappling, though they will be adjacent.  Immobilise:   While immobilised, enemies are consid- ered helpless.   Once per round the defender may at- tempt to break free.  27 Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 30 ===

Situation   Skill Roll  Attacker is   1/3   larger in SIZ   Bonus die (+1B) Attacker is   1/2   larger in SIZ   two Bonus dice (+2B)  Table 4.3: Grappling Modifiers  Inflict Pain:   The grappler inflicts damage of 1D4 + damage modifiers.   Armour does not help. Once per round the defender may attempt to break free or may attempt to turn the tables on their attacker by counter grappling.  Throw:   The opponent is thrown 2 metres and suffers 1D4 damage. Armour does not help.   The grapple ends in this case.  Disarm:   The opponent is forced to drop whatever was holding. The difference in SIZ between characters matters con- siderably.   Consult table 4.3 for some guidelines.   For greater differences the Gamemaster will determine if it makes sense to roll dice.  4.4.3   ⋆   Ranged Combat Actions  The following are potential actions:  Ranged Combat Attack:   The character can make a single ranged combat attack. In addition to the nor- mal attack, there is also the following special attack.  Aim:   If a character aims for a round he adds a Bonus die (+1B) to the character’s Ranged Combat skill. This bonus only applies to the first attack the character makes with the weapon, which must be fired at the target being aimed at. A character can take no Reac- tion while aiming without losing the aim bonus.  ▶   Throwing Close Combat Weapons  If a close combat weapon that isn’t designed to be thrown is hurled at an enemy then it has a range of 8m and suffers a penalty to the attack equal to its ENC x 10. Ranged Combat skill is used.  ▶   Using Ranged Weapons  All ranged attacks are handled in same manner as close combat attacks, with the following exceptions:  Charge:   Ranged attacks may not be used as part of a charge.  Range:   A target within the weapon’s range may be at- tacked without penalty.   A target within double the weapon’s range may be attacked, but the attacker’s weapon skill is rolled with two Penalty dice (-2P). At- tacks cannot be made at a distance beyond twice/dou- ble the weapon’s range.  Parrying:   The target may attempt to Parry a hand thrown ranged attack with a Penalty die (-1P) but may not normally Parry ranged missile weapons (such as Bows and Crossbow fire).   Shield-carrying charac- ters may Parry hand thrown missile weapons with no penalty.  Dodging:   The target may attempt to Dodge a ranged attack with a Penalty die (-1P).  Disarming:   A character may not attempt to disarm targets with ranged attacks, nor may he attempt to strike a target’s weapon or shield.  Damage Modifier:   A character may add their Dam- age modifier to ranged weapons except for crossbows.  ▶   Cover  Cover affects both ranged and close combat attacks. For missile attacks the defender benefits from the best of the shield modifier (see section 4.6) and the cover modifier below.  Partial cover (Penalty die -1P):   For example a low wall that protects the legs leaving only head and torso exposed.  Very good cover (two Penalty dice -2P):   For exam- ple a defender on a castle wall, firing from protected battlements.  Virtual total cover (Impossible / GMs discretion):  For example a castle wall with arrow slits for defenders to shot through.  28   Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 31 ===

Situation   Skill Modifier  Wind 1  High wind   -1P Fierce wind   -3P Hurricane   Attack automatically fails Target Movement 1  Target has moved 10m or more since attacker’s last Combat Ac- tion -1P Target has moved 30m or more since attacker’s last Combat Ac- tion -2P Target Visibility 1  Target obscured by smoke, mist or is in partial darkness -1P Target obscured by thick smoke, fog or is in darkness -2P Target is above SIZ 20   +1B Target Condition 1  Target is helpless   +2B Target is prone   -1P Attacker Condition 2  Attacker is prone   -2P Attacker is underwater 3 , 4   -1P Attacker is on unstable ground   -1P Attacker is blinded 4   -3P Attacker is engaged in melee 5   -2P 1.   Modifiers within these sections are not cumulative. However, modifiers from different sections are cumula- tive. Therefore, shooting at a target within a mist that has moved more than 10m since the attacker’s last Com- bat Action imparts two Penalty dice (-2P). 2. Attacker condition modifiers are cumulative. 3. Only bows and crossbows may be used underwater. 4. GMs discretion depending on the distance and the ranged weapon. 5. Per enemy; i.e.   if engaged with two enemies the modifier will be -4P.  Table 4.4: Ranged Attack Situational Modifiers  ▶   Firing into a Crowd  When firing into a crowd, the Gamemaster will deter- mine how much cover the target has from the ranged attack. The ranged attack is then resolved as normal for a target behind cover. If the attack fails to hit the target and succeeds against the unmodified attack skill, the firer has hit one of the individuals adjacent to the target chosen by the Game- master.  4.5 Movement Actions  A character may make one of the following Move Actions and unless noted otherwise does not lose either their Ac- tion or Reaction:  Change Stance:   A character may stand up from prone, or vice versa.  Fighting Retreat:   A character may move a distance up to their full Movement directly away from an enemy he is fighting. He may only defend at +1B (+2B with a Medium and Large shield).  Standard Move:   A character may move a distance up to his Movement Rate.  Sprint:   A character may move a distance up to twice their Movement Rate, forsaking their attack and only being able to dodge as a defensive reaction.  Ready Weapon:   Drawing a sword from its sheath, un- hooking an axe from one’s belt, nocking an arrow to one’s bow – all these actions take half of available movement.   A single Ready Weapon action can also include dropping a weapon currently held to the floor and then drawing a new one. Sheathing one weapon and drawing another requires the full movement as does readying two weapons.  Disengage:   A character may disengage from close com- bat but they risk a reaction attack from their oppo- nent, if a reaction is available. In such case the char- acter can dodge to avoid the attack, again if a reaction is available. Contested Movement At the Gamemaster’s discretion movement can be in- terrupted regardless of Combat Order. For example, a Player cannot make circles around an enemy just because the latter had worse Combat Order. Maybe the enemy can use their reaction to attack the Player or an opposed roll could be applicable to determine who gets an advantage, etc.  4.6 Reactions  A character can make one Reaction in a combat round. Unlike Combat Actions, Reactions are made in response to the successful hits or other actions of enemies. There are three types of Reaction, dodge, parry and opportu- nity attack:  Parries   can be made against close combat attacks.   A character can also parry hand thrown missile weapons at a -1P or without penalty if using a shield.  Dodges   can be made normally against close combat at- tacks and at a -1P penalty for ranged attacks provid- ing the target is aware of the attack.  Opportunity Attack   can be made when a character disengages from close combat. At the GM’s discretion it can apply to other contested situations as well.  29 Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 32 ===

Parry and Dodge reactions are declared after a successful attack has occurred but before its effects are applied. Resolution depends on the level of success between the participants and is described in table 4.2.  4.7 Other Actions  These actions operate under special circumstances and are not necessarily part of the normal actions and reac- tions.  Powers:   This depends on which Discipline the Power belongs to. Consult the appropriate Discipline chap- ter.  Delay:   A character may pause to assess the tactical sit- uation around him.   If a delaying character merely wishes to act after a specific character has acted, they wait until that character has finished their Combat Action.   If a delaying character wishes to interrupt a specific character’s action as it occurs, the charac- ter must make a test appropriate to his interrupting action (a weapon skill test if the character wishes to attack, for instance). Whoever wins the test acts first.  Load Crossbow:   A light crossbow requires a movement action to load while a heavy requires one full combat round.  Skill Use:   The character performs one action which re- quires the use of a skill, such as opening a locked door with the Mechanisms skill.  4.8 Critical Hits  If the D100 attack roll is not only lower than the attack skill, but also equal to or lower than the character’s crit- ical score with that skill, then the attack is considered a critical hit. In close combat a critical hit can cause two of the following effects:   do maximum damage (including the damage modifier, unless it is negative), ignore armour, free attack, trip, disarm, knock-back or knockout. Example  Rurik with his 55% Close Combat, rolls a 05, which is a critical! He chooses to do maximum damange and ignore armour. Rurik is wielding a Longsword with a damage of 1D8 and has a damage modifier of 1D6. He is fighting a heavily armoured Knight, who has the latest Plate Mail armour (AP 6).   However this Armour is completely ignored as Rurik’s sword slides through a gap in the plates doing a devastating 14 points of damage (8 from the sword and 6 from the damage modifier).  In ranged combat a critical hit will do maximum damage (including the damage modifier, unless it is neg- ative) and ignore armour. When parrying a successful attack with a critical parry you can block all damage regardless of the weapon size difference. A critical hit is avoided only by a critical parry (weapon categories apply) or dodge.  4.9 Fumbles  Conversely if an attacker or defender fumbles by rolling 99 or 00, the character has been put at a severe disad- vantage. It is up to the Gamemaster to determine how, dependant on the situation. Here are some examples:  Grievously hurt self or nearby friend with weapon, roll damage and ignore armour.  Trip over and fall prone, missing one combat round.  Armour or shield strap breaks, lose armour protec- tion.  Weapon is damaged or breaks.  4.10 Damage  When a character successfully scores damage against a target it must be deducted from the target’s hit points. Every weapon has a damage rating, which is listed in its statistical entry in the relevant weapon table in the Equipment chapter.   This rating is the amount of dice rolled when the weapon successfully hits a target. The attacker’s Damage Modifier is usually added to this. All damage is taken away from Hit Points.  Last hit point.   The character falls prone and will stay conscious only with a critical Resilience test roll.  Hit points equal zero.   The character is dead.   How- ever, you can spend Hero Points to avoid death.  4.10.1   ⋆   Major Wounds  If the character takes half of their original Hit Points in one go then they suffer a major wound.   This repre- sents badly mangled limbs, shattered bones and severely damaged internal organs. At the GMs discression, you may also roll on the Major Wound Table below to see what type of permanent impairment the character has suffered. They must immediately make a Resilience roll, with two Penalty dice (-2P), or fall unconscious.   If the test is successfull then the character’s DEX is immediately halved and the character may only fight on for as many combat rounds as their remaining hit points before falling unconscious. This is in addition to any effects described in the Major Wound Table, if used. The effects of major wounds are permanent, unless healed using Powers. The halved DEX is regained once the character starts to heal, since it represents the shock and trauma of the wound.  30   Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 33 ===

Roll D10   Major Wound  1   Lose an eye, all Perception rolls suffer two Penalty dice (-2P), lose 4 points of DEX, 1 point of CHA permanently. 2   Cracked skull, brain damage. Lose 4 points of INT. All skills involving mental processes suffer   a   Penalty   die   (-1P)   permanently. This includes Perception, Persistence, and all Lore, Culture, and Craft skills. 3   Right Leg muscles badly cut/mangled or leg bone shattered and becomes useless. Fall prone, can only crawl at 1m per round. Lose 2 points of DEX and 2 points of STR permanently. 4   Left Leg muscles badly cut/mangled or leg bone shattered and becomes useless.   Fall prone, can crawl at 1m per round. Lose 2 points of DEX and 2 points of STR per- manently. 5   Broken ribs, all skills suffer two Penalty dice (-2P), due to severe pain. Lose 2 points of DEX permanently. 6   Slashed stomach. Lose one extra hit point per round from blood loss.   Lose 3 points of CON permanently. 7   Heart stops in shock!   Lose consciousness for the next D10 combat rounds, falls prone and can not move. Lose 2 points of CON permanently. 8   Spine broken.   The character permanently paralysed below the neck (odd result on dice) or the torso (even result on dice). Half DEX permanently. 9   Left Arm badly broken and becomes useless permanently. Automatically drop any held items. 10   Right Arm badly broken and becomes use- less permanently.   Automatically drop any held items.  Table 4.5: Major Wounds  4.10.2   ⋆   Fatal Wounds  A fatal wound occurs if a character takes damage equal to, or in excess of, their original hit points in one go. This represents hacked off limbs, blows that shatter rib cages, decapitation, blows that stab the heart or other vital organs directly. The character is immediately dead.  4.11 Special Combat Rules  4.11.1   ⋆   Mounted Combat  A mounted warrior has a Bonus die (+1B) to his at- tacks and parries against adjacent opponents on foot; a character on foot defending against a mounted attacker suffers a Penalty die (-1P) to his Reaction skill. These modifiers do not apply if the target on foot is as tall (or has a weapon 2 sizes bigger) as the mounted character is. In addition:  A mounted character uses his mount’s Movement Rate when moving rather than his own.  A mounted character charging with a Lance uses his mount’s Damage Modifier rather than his own.  A mounted adventurer can use no weapon at a skill level greater than his Riding skill score.  ▶   Untrained Mounts  The rider of a mount unused to combat must make a Riding Skill test at the start of each Combat Round. On success the horse is treated as a trained mount for the remainder of the Combat Round.   On failure the horse flees combat (use the Sprint action) at every opportunity for the remainder of the Combat Round.  4.11.2   ⋆   Second Weapon or Shield  A character wielding two weapons or a weapon and a shield may use the off-hand item to either:  Gain an additional Parry or Opportunity attack per Combat Round (over and above the normal Reaction allowance)  Gain a single bonus Close Combat Attack action. This bonus attack is at a Penalty die (-1P) to Close Combat Skill and may only be a normal Close Combat Attack, not a special attack like All Out Attack, Disarming Attack, Great Attack, etc.  4.11.3   ⋆   Combat Skills above 100%  When two combatants have skills above 100% battle may start to become repetitive, i.e. attacks will succeed but dodges/parries will also succeed thus a lot of time may be wasted in back and forth rolling until someone rolls a critical or a fumble. Instead, an opposed skill check may be rolled to de- termine the winner of the contest immediately.   See page 12 for more on opposed skill tests of over 100%.  31 Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 34 ===

Action   Description  Charge   Character moves twice movement, followed by a close combat attack with a +1D6 to damage. Loses Reaction for the round. If charging uphill do not apply the extra damage. Close Combat Attack   Character attacks opponent with weapon, tests vs.   Close Combat skill.   If successful does weapon damage plus damage modifier. All Out Attack   Two attacks at a Penalty die (-1P). Gives up Reaction for round. Great Attack   One attack at a Bonus die (+1B) with maximum damage modifier.   Gives up Reaction for round. Disarming Attack   Attack at a Penalty die (-1P) to disarm opponent. Weapon or shield is thrown 1D6 meters away. Trip Attack   Attack at a Penalty die (-1P) to trip opponent. Opponent falls prone. Knockout Attack   Attack at a Penalty die (-1P) to knock out opponent.   If the damage is equal to a major wound the target is knocked out. Otherwise minimum weapon damage. Knock-Back Attack   Attack with shield (at a Penalty die (-1P) if in off-hand). If opponent fails to parry or dodge he is pushed back 2 meters and needs an Athletics roll at a Penalty die (-1P) or fall prone. Set Weapon   As an action the character sets a spear or polearm in anticipation of a charge. When it occurs the character attacks first with a Bonus die (+1B) to weapon skill. Standard Move   The character moves their Movement Rate in metres as a free action, once per round. Change Stance   May move from prone to standing and vice versa. Fighting Retreat   Moves their Movement Rate and defends at a Bonus die (+1B) (+2B if using a Medium or Large Shield). Sprint   Moves twice Movement Rate. May not attack and may only Dodge as a reaction. Ranged Combat Attack   Character attacks opponent with weapon, tests vs.   Ranged Combat skill if successful then does weapon damage (plus damage modifier, except for crossbows). Ranged Combat Aim   Character aims for a combat round to gain a Bonus die (+1B) to the next ranged attack. Use Supernatural Power   Character uses a supernatural Power. Cost and effect depends on the Discipline. Delay   Character either waits until after another character’s action or tries to interrupt it. Intimidate/Persuade   The character uses their Influence skill vs the enemies’ Persistence to either intimidate, or persuade foes who are facing defeat, to flee or surrender. Ready Weapon   Character draws or loads weapon making it ready for combat. It takes half his movement to ready a single weapon. Skill Use   Character uses a non combat skill. Unarmed Attack   The character can either attack using a natural weapon, such as a fist or claw, or grapple.  Table 4.6: Summary of Combat Actions  32   Chapter 4.   Combat

=== PAGE 35 ===

PartII Disciplines and Powers

=== PAGE 36 ===

CHAPTER 5  Disciplines  5.1 Introduction  Disciplines provide a wide variety of different extraordi- nary and/or supernatural options to embelish your cam- paigns. You can pick and choose what disciplines make more sense to your campaign or you can even come up with your own. Common in all disciplines is their dependence on cer- tain characteristics.   Most use POW and spend Power Points one way or another.  5.2 Power  5.2.1   ⋆   Regaining Power Points  Using Power Points is a draining and exhausting activity that requires a major effort from which the body needs to recover. Power Points regenerate once the character fully rests, either by sitting down and taking it very easy or by having a good nights sleep. For every two hour period that a character rests they regain Power Points equal to a quarter of their POW total. Example  Rurik, with a POW of 8, takes two hours of rest to regain two Power Points, four hours to regain four Power Points, six hours to regain six Power Points and eight hours to regain the full eight Power Points.  Basically, if the character has a comfortable unin- terrupted sleep of eight hours they will regain their full power points. Characters may never exceed their origi- nal Power Point total by resting.  5.2.2   ⋆   Zero Power Points  A character who is reduced to zero Power Points falls unconscious until he has regained one Power Point.  5.2.3   ⋆   Beyond Maximum  There are ways of surpassing the maximum number of Power Points available to characters by using some of the supernatural powers described in the disciplines found in  the following chapters. For example, practitioners of the Folk Magic discipline can have access to additional pools of Power Points, via bound Magic Spirits (see Call Spirit spell) and magic items that act as Power Point Stores (see Create Power Point Store spell).   However, these pools regenerate, if at all, independently of the charac- ter’s natural rate. Experienced Folk Magic users could potentially have several Power Point stores and bound Magic Spirits at their disposal, which allows them to cast many of their spells without using their own pre- cious pool of Power Points.  34   Chapter 5.   Disciplines

=== PAGE 37 ===

CHAPTER 6  Battle  The Battle Discipline represents years of advanced traning in combat techniques.   It enables warriors to reach an understanding of the flow of battle to such a degree that he can gain advantages over their oppo- nents. Some times that is forcing an opponent to leave an opening or positioning themselves in such a way to avoid harm. Other times it enables unprecedented focus and calmness in the midst of battle enabling precise and calculated blows.  6.1 Spot Rules  6.1.1   ⋆   Learning Battle  Characters learn Battle from other characters who know the practice. They need to have at least 51% to a combat skill and spend two Improvement Points to get access to the Battle discipline. Each technique is learnt separately.  6.1.2   ⋆   Learning Techniques  Characters learn Battle Techniques from other charac- ters who know the appropriate techniques.   Learning techniques costs one Improvement Point per Magnitude point. The maximum number of Battle Techniques a char- acter can learn is INT/2. Battle Techniques can be learnt from a number of sources.   The most typical is from military academies but it can also be from the lone retired veteran. In each case the player character must be in good standing with the teacher before they will teach them a technique.   If the teacher is indifferent to the player character to start with then they will first need to un- dertake some kind of service, which can be the focus of an adventure. Optional: Self-taught With enough perseverance a character can practice and learn new Battle Techniques by themselves but that will cost them double the Improvement Points normally required.  6.1.3   ⋆   Using Techniques  A character can use a technique freely as part of a com- bat action or reaction.   Only a single Battle Technique can be used per combat round.   Any Battle Technique needs to be declared before the appropriate dice is rolled. Applying a Battle Technique is always successful but you have to spend a number of Power Points equal to the Magnitude of the technique.  6.1.4   ⋆   Techniques Traits  Unless otherwise stated all Techniques have the following traits.  Are instant and apply only for the action or reac- tion that are rolled for.  Can not be used in combination with special at- tacks like Great Attack, Disarming Attack, Aim, etc.  Are Non-Variable; they can only be used at the specified Magnitude.  6.2 Techniques  The battle techniques can improve various aspects of combat.   Some are improved versions of existing ma- noeuvres, like Improved Disarm, while other are new, like Defensive Stance.   These manoeuvres make more sense to acquire for combat experts since they will al- ready have a high skill (which is harder to increase).  35 Chapter 6.   Battle

=== PAGE 38 ===

Technique   Magnitude   Effect  Awareness   3   When the warrior is aware of an opponent the latter cannot gain a flanking bonus for three combat rounds. Combat Focus   2   Allows a warrior to make a close combat attack with a Bonus die (+1B). Combat Mastery   3   Allows a warrior to make a close combat attack with a Bonus die (+1B) and +2 damage.   If Combat Focus is already known it can be substituted with this technique with one Improvement Point. Confuse   2   Can only be used for an attack action and forces the opponent’s parry or dodge to be at a Penalty die (-1P). Deadly Aim   3   Allows a warrior to make a ranged attack with a Bonus die (+1B) and +2 damage. If Impr. Aim is already known it can be substituted with this technique with one IP. Defensive Stance   4   When the warrior is wielding a shield their effective Armour Points is increased by two for four combat rounds. Extra Reaction   3   The warrior gains an extra reaction in this round with a Penalty die (-1P). Impr. Combat Order   2   Allows a warrior to react faster (needs to declare before Combat Order rolls). It provides +4 to Combat Order. Impr. Aim   2   The attack is similar to the Aim special attack but is immediate. Impr. All Out Attack   4   The attack is similar to the All Out special attack but without losing the reaction. Impr. Disarm   2   The attack is similar to the Disarm special attack but without the penalty. Impr. Trip   2   The attack is similar to the Trip special attack but without the penalty. Impr. Great Attack   4   Allows a warrior to make a Great Attack without losing their reaction. Impr. Intimidate   2   The warrior’s intimidate (Influence) gains a Bonus die (+1B). Impr. Knock-Back   2   The attack is similar to the Knock-Back special attack but without the penalty. Impr. Knockout   2   The attack is similar to the Knockout special attack but without the penalty. Protect   3   If you and an ally are within 3m of the same enemy you may intervene and force the enemy to attack you instead. This counts as a free action. Twin Attack   2   The attack is similar to the All Out special attack but with no penalty for the first attack. Twin Missile   4   Allows a warrior to make an additional single ranged attack action at Penalty die (-1P) in quick succession. Unarmed Fast Attack   2   When unarmed a warrior can make an additional unarmed attack at Penalty die (-1P) in quick succession. Unarmed Focus   2   Allows a warrior to make an unarmed attack with a Bonus die (+1B). Unarmed Mastery   3   Allows a warrior to make an unarmed attack with a Bonus die (+1B) and +2 damage.   If Unarmed Focus is already known it can be substituted with this technique with one Improvement Point.  Table 6.1: Battle Techniques  36   Chapter 6.   Battle

=== PAGE 39 ===

CHAPTER 7  Folk Magic  This discipline represents common magic or hedge magic.   It is the typical type of magic that most cam- paigns will have. Magic is generally of a practical nature, meant to address battle or the common ills of the com- munity: healing the sick, bringing love or luck, driving away evil forces, finding lost items, reading omens and so on.  7.1 Spot Rules  7.1.1   ⋆   Learning Folk Magic  Folk Magic Casting is treated as a skill. The base chance for Folk Magic Casting is POWx3. Spells are learnt sep- arately, but the Folk Magic Casting skill determines the success for casting all Folk Magic spells.   Characters learn Folk Magic from other characters who know the practice. It costs four Improvement Points to get access to the Magic discipline.  7.1.2   ⋆   Learning Spells  Characters learn Folk Magic spells from other characters who know the appropriate spells. Learning spells costs one Improvement Point per Magnitude point. If a char- acter knows a spell at a lower Magnitude, they only have to pay the difference in Improvement Points to gain the spell at a higher Magnitude. Example  Adjin already knows Coordination at 2 Magnitude. He wants to learn Coordination 3, so he must only spend one Improvement Point to gain the spell at that Mag- nitude.  Folk Magic can be learnt from a number of sources. The most typical is from some kind of school of magic appropriate for the campaign or from remote hermits and otherworldly Shamans who commune with the Spirit World and learn it’s secrets.   In some cases, it can be learnt from local priests who teach Folk Magic associated with their god’s mythological exploits. In each case the player character must be in good standing with the teacher before they will teach them the spell. If the teacher is indifferent to the player character to start with then they will first need to undertake some kind of service, which can be the focus of an adventure.  7.1.3   ⋆   Limits to Folk Magic  A character has a limit of their INTx2 in magnitude in spells.   So a character with an INT of 10 can learn 20 worth of Magnitude spells. In addition, some Folk Magic spells are variable, which means that they can have a magnitude of anywhere from one to a maximum value of six.  7.1.4   ⋆   Casting Spells  A character must be able to move his hands to make gestures, be able to chant and be able to see his target in order to cast a spell. When the character is casting a spell under duress, such as in the midst of combat, they must pass a Folk Magic Casting test to successfully cast the spell. In this regard Folk Magic is like any other skill. If the character is relaxed and has all the time in the world then no casting test is needed, the spell is automatically cast. The result of the Folk Magic casting test depends on its success:  Success:   A number of Power Points are deducted from the spellcaster’s total, equal to the Magnitude of the spell. The spell then takes effect.  Failure:   The spell does not take effect and the character loses one Power Point.  37 Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 40 ===

Critical:   The caster has been able to control the flow of the magic particularly effectively. The character loses one Power Point instead of the normal cost of the spell or Gamemaster discretion.  Fumble:   The caster has been unable to control the flow of the Folk Magic. Rather than losing a single Power Point for failing to cast the spell, the caster loses a number of Power Points equal to its Magnitude or Gamemaster discretion.  ▶   Casting Time  No other action may be taken whilst casting a spell, though the character may slowly walk up to half their Movement while spell casting. Casting begins at the start of the combat round and a spell’s effect happens on the caster’s Combat Order. Distractions, or attacks on the caster as he casts, will automatically ruin the spell, unless the caster suc- cessfully passes a Persistence test, thereby maintaining concentration on the spell. Examples of distraction in- clude blinding, disarming, or wounding the caster.  ▶   Dismissing Spells  In a single Combat Round, a caster can dismiss any Per- manent spell(s) he has cast, as a free action. Ceasing to cast a Concentration spell is immediate and not an ac- tion.  7.1.5   ⋆   Spell Traits  Unless otherwise stated all Folk Magic spells have the following traits.  They have Variable Magnitude.   This means that the Magnitude of the spell starts from the stated Magnitude and then can be cast at a higher Mag- nitude, if the caster knows it, giving an increase in the effect of the spell.  The Base Magnitude is one.  Range is equal to the caster’s POWx3 in metres.  They have a Duration of ten minutes. Other traits used by spells are detailed below.  Area (X):   The spell affects all targets within a radius specified in metres.  Concentration:   The spell’s effects will remain in place so long as the character continues to concentrate on it.   Concentrating on a spell is functionally identical to casting the spell, requiring the caster to continue to chant and ignore distractions.  Instant:   The spell’s effects take place instantly.   The spell itself then disappears.  Magnitude (X):   The strength and power of the spell. Also the minimum number of Power Points required to cast it.  Non-Variable:   The spell may only be cast at the stated Magnitude.  Permanent:   The spell’s effects remain in place until they are dispelled or dismissed.  Resist (Dodge/Persistence/Resilience):   The spell’s intended effects do not succeed automatically.   The target may make a Dodge, Persistence or Resilience test (as specified by the spell) in order to avoid the effect of the spell entirely. Note that Resist (Dodge) spells require the target to be able to use Reactions in order to Dodge. In the case of Area spells, the Resist (Dodge) trait requires the target to dive in order to mitigate the spell’s effect.  Touch:   Touch spells require the character to actually touch his target for the spell to take effect, using a Unarmed skill test to make contact.  Trigger:   The spell will lie dormant until an event stated in the description takes place.   The spell then takes effect and is expended.  7.2 Spells  ▶   Animal Whisperer  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Touch The caster whispers into the ear of a distressed an- imal, calming it.   If the distressed animal is under the influence of a spell such as Fear or Scare, then it gets another Persistence test to shake off the effect of the spell.  38   Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 41 ===

▶   Awareness  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable This spell grants the recipient awareness as if they had physically got eyes in the back of their head for the duration of the spell.   This allows them to make Perception rolls, and be aware of others behind them as they are with senses in front of them.  ▶   Babel  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Resist (Persistence) If this spell is successful, it garbles the language of the affected creature. The target can still think and, for the most part, act normally, but anything it says comes out as gibberish. Thus, a commanding officer would be unable to give orders to his men and a spellcaster would be unable to cast spells.  ▶   Beast Call  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Instant, Resist (Resilience) The Beast Call serves to attract an animal within range. When the spell is cast, it affects a targeted crea- ture with a fixed INT of 7 or less.   If it fails to resist, the creature will be naturally drawn to the place where the spell is cast, whereupon the spell effect terminates. Any barrier, immediate threat, or counter control, also ends the effects of the spell, leaving the creature to react naturally. For example, the Beast Call spell might cause a horse to turn and walk towards the spell, but a single yank of its reins by the rider would end the spell’s effect. This spell is a potent aid to hunters and herders.  ▶   Befuddle  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Resist (Persistence) This spell confuses and clouds the mind of its target if they fail a Persistence roll.   The affected target may not cast spells and may only take non-offensive actions. The target may run if it so chooses and may dodge and normally parry in combat. Any skills that have INT as a base are at a Penalty die (-1P) when tested while the target is under the effects of this spell. This spell is effective against humanoids and natural creatures.   Other creatures (such as spirits or magical beasts like dragons) are not affected by this spell.  ▶   Block Sense (Sense)  Magnitude 3, Non-Variable, Resist (Persistence) Depending on the version of this spell it will Blind/Deaf- en/Desensitise taste or smell/Numb touch on a failed resistance roll for the duration of the spell.  ▶   Call Spirit (Type)  Magnitude 3, Non-Variable, Resist (Persistence) This spell summons a single spirit of a given type from the Spirit World to do the bidding of the caster. The spirit resists the call by using its Persistence.   If it succeeds, it can return to the Spirit World.   Unless combined with a Binding attempt (see Spirit Binding Ritual), the spirit that fails a Persistence roll must per- form one action, within its power, for the caster, after which it returns to the Spirit World.  Disease spirits, inflict disease upon the possessed victim.  Passion (Fear/Madness/Pain) these spirits work upon the passions of a victim and cause mental debilitation and distress.  Healing spirits, can be used to heal wounds and drive out possessing Disease spirits.  Magic spirits, know spells and have power points that the caller may use.  Guardian Spirits, protect a location for the casters POW in minutes.  Ancestor Spirit, can pass on one piece of wisdom or increase one skill for the spell’s duration.  ▶   Care  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Touch This charm places the recipient under the care of the caster. If the caster has any active Protection or Countermagic spells, the Cared for character also bene- fits from the effects of these spells.  ▶   Clear Path  Touch This spell allows the caster to move through even the most tangled, thorny brush, as if they were on an open road. For each additional point of Magnitude, they may bring one person with him.  ▶   Coordination  Touch For every two points of Magnitude, the target’s com- bat order increases by +4, whether casting spells or fight- ing.   In addtion the target gains a Bonus die (+1B) to Dodge or DEX-based Athletics tests.  39 Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 42 ===

▶   Counter-Attack  Magnitude 1, Non-Variable, Trigger This spell lies dormant until the recipient is attacked. Then, after the normal defensive reaction of the recipi- ent, it fires off, allowing the recipient to follow up with a counter attack.   The counter attack is an additional action, on top of the recipient’s normal attacking action.  ▶   Counter-Defense  Magnitude 1, Non-Variable, Trigger This spell lies dormant until the recipient is success- fully attacked.   Then after the normal reaction of the recipient, it fires off allowing the recipient an extra reac- tion.  ▶   Countermagic  Instant Countermagic is only ever used as a Reaction, and only when another spell is cast within Countermagic’s Range that the character wishes to counter. A successful Countermagic disrupts the other spell and nullifies it. As long as Countermagic’s Magnitude equals or exceeds the target spell’s Magnitude, the target spell is countered.  ▶   Create Charms  Permanent A charm is a physical item that stores one or more Folk Magic spells.   A charm could be a necklace that holds a Befuddle 4 spell, a shield etched with runes that holds a Countermagic 2 spell, or even a sheet of paper with a poem written on it that, when held against the skin, provides a Protection 1 spell.  To create a charm a character must possess both the spell they wish to store and Create Charm at the same Magnitude.  The item into which the charm is to be cast must be prepared and in contact with the caster for the length of the casting.  If the caster spends one Improvement Point at the time of creation, the spell is reusable.   Otherwise once the spell is cast the Charm is dispelled.   A spell stored in a Charm is used like any other spell that the possessor knows. It uses the wielder’s Folk Magic Casting skill and is powered by the wielder’s Power Points.  If the caster spends three Improvement Points per Magnitude at the time of creation the spell within the Charm is reusable, once per day (1/day), with- out requiring a Folk Magic Casting skill or any Power.   It can be activated as an Action.   If the Create Charms spell is cast again then it becomes 2/day, and so on. Not all spells can be stored this way and the Gamemaster has the final say.  If the caster spends ten Improvement Points per Magnitude at the time of creation the spell within the Charm is always active, without requiring a Folk Magic Casting skill or any Power. These are the most powerful charms.   Not all spells can be stored this way and the Gamemaster has the final say.  The time taken to create a single-use Charm is one hour per point of Magnitude of the spell be- ing stored; Reusable Charms take three hours per point of Magnitude to create.  Charms are mundane items.   Breaking the item dispels the Charm.  ▶   Create Power Point Store  Permanent This spell allows the caster to create an item which has Power Point storing capabilities.   This allows the owner to have a pool of Power Points in addition to their own. Typically crystals are used, due to their physical tough- ness, in game terms treat them as unbreakable.   This also applies to charms, such as a sword with Weapon Enhancement 2 stored in it, to provide a pool of power points to cast the spell from. Power Point stores take one hour per Power Point stored in them to create. For each Magnitude, one Power Point can be stored. Unless one Improvement Point is spent when they are created they are non-reusable.   Once the Power Points are used the item loses its ability to store Power Points. If the Improvement Point is spent the item then be- comes reusable.   Once all the Power Points are used, the item can be refilled instantly from the user’s own Power Points. The caster must fill the item with their own Power Points as part of the spell. The amount of Power Points put into the item at the time of casting becomes the maximum that can be put into the item. This maximum can not be increased after the spell is cast. If the item is damaged or destroyed the Power Points are released harmlessly into the surrounding area.  ▶   Create Potions  Permanent Potions are liquids that store one or more Folk Magic spells. The Magnitude of the Create Potion spell needs to equal or exceed the highest Magnitude of the spell being stored into the potion.  All potions are one use.   They must be drunk in one swift gulp to work.  40   Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 43 ===

The potion automatically works and doesn’t incur a cost in Power Points to the person who is drink- ing it.  If multiple spells are placed in the potion, they are all cast on the drinker when the potion is drunk.  The potion costs the enchanter Power Points. They must know the spell at the Magnitude enchanting at, with the Power Points of the spell(s) placed into the potion.  There is an associated cost of 10 Gold Pieces per Magnitude in materials, which includes the flask that contains the potion.  To make the potion, the enchanter must roll suc- cessfully against Folk Magic Casting for each spell being placed in the potion and against Lore (Po- tion Making). If they fail the potion is ruined and they lose the cost of the ingredients.  Potions take one hour per point of Magnitude of spell(s) stored to create.  A potion must be stored in an airtight container, or it evaporates, losing one point of Magnitude per week.  ▶   Create Scrolls  Permanent This spell allows the caster to create a written version of the spell for later use. Either to impart knowledge of the spell to a trainee or as a reference when casting the spell in the field.  The caster must be able to read and write in some form of written language, which is represented by having a Language skill of over 80%.   They must also pay for the special inks and scroll paper (10 Gold Pieces per point of magnitude).  The trainee must be able to read the language that the scroll uses. Once every three months they may study the scroll, which takes one day per magni- tude of the spell, and then make a Language skill test. If successful, they spend the normal Improve- ment Point cost to learn the spell.   If they roll a critical they spend half that cost, to the nearest whole unit.   If they fumble, they can never learn the spell from that scroll, it is beyond their under- standing.  To directly cast a spell from the scroll, the caster must be able to read the language the scroll uses. Then cast the spell as normal.   Casting is much slower than if the caster is casting the spell from memory. First, the caster reads the spell out loud and then harnesses and shapes the magical ener- gies. Therefore, no matter what their normal cast- ing skill, the spell takes an entire combat round to cast, and fires off at the end of the combat round.  ▶   Cushion Fall  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable The successful casting of the spell eliminates all falling damange for the recipient for the duration of the spell.  ▶   Darkwall  Area 5, Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Concentration Light sources within a Darkwall area shed no light and normal sight ceases to function. Other senses such as a bat’s sonar function normally.   The caster may move the Darkwall 15 metres per Combat Round if they con- centrate on the spell.  ▶   Demoralise  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Resist (Persistence) This spell creates doubt and uncertainty into the very heart and soul of the target.   The target of this spell has all Weapon skills halved and may not cast offensive spells.   If this spell takes effect before combat begins, the target will try to avoid fighting and will either run or surrender. The effects of this spell are automatically cancelled by the Fanaticism spell and vice versa.  ▶   Detect (X)  Magnitude 1, Non-Variable, Concentration This covers a family of spells that all operate in a similar fashion, allowing the caster to locate the closest target of the spell within its range. This effect is stopped by a thick substance, such as metal, earth or stone, if it  41 Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 44 ===

is at least one metre thick. It is also blocked by Counter- magic, though the caster will know the target is some- where within range (though not its precise location) and that it is being protected by Countermagic.   The sep- arate Detect spells are listed below and each must be learned separately.  Detect Enemy:   Gives the location of the nearest creatures, that intend to harm the caster.  Detect Magic:   Gives the location of the nearest magic item, magical creature or active spell.  Detect Species: Each Detect Species spell will give the location of the nearest creature of the speci- fied species. Examples of this spell include Detect Goblin, Detect Rhino and Detect Elf.  Detect Substance:   Each Detect Substance spell will give the location of the nearest substance of the specified type. Examples of this spell include Detect Coal, Detect Gold and Detect Wood.  ▶   Dispel Magic  Instant This spell will attack and eliminate other spells. Dis- pel Magic will eliminate a combined Magnitude of spells equal to its own Magnitude, starting with the most pow- erful affecting the target.   If it fails to eliminate any spell (because the spell’s Magnitude is too high), then its effects immediately end and no more spells will be eliminated.   A spell cannot be partially eliminated, so a target under the effects of a spell whose Magnitude is higher than that of Dispel Magic will not have any spells currently affecting it eliminated.  ▶   Disruption  Instant, Resist (Resilience) Disruption literally pulls a target’s body apart. The target will suffer 1D4 points of damage per point of Mag- nitude, ignoring any Armour Points.  ▶   Dragon Fire  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Instant, Resist (Dodge) With this spell, the caster throws a stream of fire at his target. If the fire is not dodged, it inflicts 1D10 points of heat damage. Armour Points are effective against this damage and it counts as both magical and fire damage.  ▶   Drive Out Spirit  Instant, Resist (Persistence) This spell excommunicates a spirit that is either dom- inantly or covertly possessing a character or physical lo- cation. The spirit resists eviction from its host using its  Persistence, with a penalty of -10% for every Magnitude point of the spell. If the spirit fails the test, it goes back to the Spirit World.  ▶   Dull Weapon  This spell can be cast on any weapon. For every point of Magnitude it reduces the damage dealt by the target weapon by one.   This spell does not affect the damage inflicted by the damage bonus of the user.  ▶   Enhance Skill (X)  Instant Like Detect (X), this includes a number of differ- ent spells, each of which affects a different non-combat skill. For every 2 points of Magnitude, the recipient gains a Bonus die (+1B) to any skill test using the Enhanced skill. Alternatively, for each additional 2 points of Mag- nitude of the spell, the caster can affect one more tar- get. The bonuses and targets can be split as necessary, providing each bonus is a Bonus die (+1B) (costing 2 Magnitude). For example, Adjin may have Enhance Skill (Decep- tion) 4.   He could cast it all on himself to give two Bonus dice (+2B) to his Deception, or could cast it on himself and an ally, giving himself a Bonus die (+1B) and his ally a Bonus die (+1B). The most common spells of this type are:  Enhance Skill (Deception), often used by thieves.  Enhance Skill (Trade), used by merchants.  Enhance Skill (Influence), used by lawyers, con- artists and officers.  42   Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 45 ===

Enhance Skill (Resilience), used by warriors.  Enhance Skill (Persistence) used by magicians. These spells are sometimes called by other names, such as “Cover of Night” or “Shadowstealth” (for En- hance Deception), “Golden Tongue” (for Enhance Influ- ence or Trade), or “Toughen” (for Enhance Resilience).  ▶   Extinguish  Instant This spell instantly puts out fires.   At Magnitude 1 it can extinguish a Flame, Magnitude 2 a Small Fire, Magnitude 3 a Large Fire and Magnitude 4 will put out an Inferno.  ▶   Extra Defense  Magnitude 2 For every two points of Magnitude the target gains one extra reaction per combat round.  ▶   Fanaticism  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable The target of this spell will have close combat and unarmed combat skills increased by a Bonus die (+1B) but may not attempt to parry, dodge or cast spells. Also for the duration of the spell the target has two Bonus dice (+2B) bonus to any Persistence test related to Morale. The effects of this spell are automatically cancelled by the Demoralise spell and vice versa.  ▶   Farsight  Concentration Each point of this spell extends the caster’s field of vision by twenty metres as long as they maintain their concentration. Although they can see small details at a distance, this spell does not let the caster see through walls or other obstructions.  ▶   Fire Missile  Magnitude 4, Non-Variable, Touch Casting this spell on a ranged weapon will cause mis- siles fired/throwed to burst into flame.   When it hits a target, the missile will deal a die higher than normal of magical fire damage (1D6 becomes 1d8, 2d8 becomes 2d10, etc).   A missile weapon under the effects of Fire Missile cannot benefit from Multi Missile or Speedart. Since Fire Missile does magical damage, it damages crea- tures immune to normal damage.  ▶   Fire Weapon  Magnitude 4, Non-Variable, Touch For the duration of the spell, the target melee weapon will deal a die higher than normal of magical fire dam- age. A weapon under the effects of Fire Weapon cannot benefit from Weapon Enhance. Since Fire Weapon does magical damage, it damages creatures immune to normal damage.  ▶   Fist of Gold  Instant This spell creates a minor illusion of 10D10 Gold Pieces per level of Magnitude that persists for the dura- tion of the spell.  ▶   Fist of the Wind  Instant Each point of Magnitude allows the caster to make one extra unarmed attack.   These attacks happen in a blur of motion, at the same Combat Order that the nor- mal attack occurs.  ▶   Flying Kick  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable This spell allows the recipient to make a normal move as a flying leap through the air, then make a Kick attack at the end of the move.  ▶   Frostbite  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Instant, Resist (Resilience) This attack spell allows the caster to freeze their op- ponent, dealing 1D8 points of damage, ignoring any Ar- mour Points.   Magical protection against cold damage can block this effect, but mundane items (such as cold weather gear) are ineffective.  ▶   Glue  Area, Touch This spell covers an area of one centimetre square for each Magnitude with extremely sticky glue. If a creature steps on the glue, it must make an Athletics roll vs the Magnitude x 10% to avoid being stuck for one round. On subsequent rounds it must make the same roll to break free. This spell can also be used for more conventional repairs, a broken sword for example, with Magnitude x 10% being the chance that the item won’t break again, if used in circumstances that would cause it to.  43 Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 46 ===

▶   Hand of Death  Instant, Magnitude 4, Non-Variable, Resist (Resilience), Touch This fearsome spell allows the caster to deal an aw- ful wound with the merest touch. Casting the Hand of Death, charges his body with the spell. Touching an un- suspecting target, or succeeding at an Unarmed attack against a wary target, releases the spell’s effect.   If the Resilience test to resist the effect is failed, the victim immediately loses half their maximum Hit Points, and suffers a a Major Wound. If the Resilience test is a suc- cess, the target only loses 1D3 Hit Points. Armour does not protect against this damage.  ▶   Harden  Magnitude 1, Non-Variable, Touch This spell makes a target item unbreakable for the duration of the spell. Therefore weapons with this spell cast on them will not break when a Fumble is rolled in combat, and it allows items that are normally too brittle to be wielded in combat to be used as improvised weapons.  ▶   Heal  Instant, Touch For every point of Magnitude of this spell, the caster can repair one Hit Point of damage to either himself or another target.   In addition, a Heal spell of any Mag- nitude will stabilise a character suffering from a Major Wound, and/or revive a character who is unconscious. A Magnitude 4 (or two consequtive Heal 3 spells) or higher Heal spell will also cure any single poison or disease affecting the target. A Magnitude 6 (or two consequtive Heal 5 spells) or higher Heal spell will also repair the effects of a single Major Wound.  ▶   Hinder Skill (X)  Resist (Persistence) Like Enhance Skill (X), this is a number of different spells, each of which affects a different skill.   For every 2 points of Magnitude of the spell, the target gains a Penalty die (-1P) to the next skill test using the affected skill. Alternatively, for each additional 2 points of Magni- tude of the spell, the caster can affect one more target. The penalties and targets can be split as necessary pro- viding each penalty is a Penalty die (-1P) (costing 2 Magnitude). If used in this way, each target is affected separately; if one target succeeds on resisting the spell, other targets may fail and be affected. The most common spells of this type are:   Hinder Skill (Perception), often used by thieves; Hinder Skill (Trade), used by the nastier traders; and Hinder Skill (Persistence) used by magicians against enemy spell- casters prior to casting spells upon them.  ▶   Ignite  Instant, Magnitude 1, Non-Variable Ignite will set fire to anything flammable within range, creating a flame. Skin or flesh cannot be ignited and if the target is attached to a living being (such as hair, fur or clothes) then the spell gains the Resist (Resilience) trait.  ▶   Invisibility  Magnitude 4, Non-Variable, Concentration, Touch, Per- sonal For the duration of the spell the recipient is com- pletely invisible to sight.   They can still be heard, felt or smelled, with a Penalty die (-1P) to Perception tests. Also, the spell is automatically dispelled if the caster loses concentration, or the recipient casts a spell or makes an attack.   The recipient also becomes visible immedi- ately after the spell ending, so even if the caster im- mediately casts another Invisibility spell there will be a delay between castings where the recipient is visible.  ▶   Invoke Ancestor Spirit  Magnitude 3, Non-Variable, Resist (Persistence) This spell in many ways resembles Call Spirit, but specifically summons one of the characters deceased an- cestors to aid them. The ancestor that appears is usually random, but if the character knows the name of an ances- tor that he has summoned before then they can summon them again.   The ancestor is not always guaranteed to  44   Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 47 ===

be friendly to the player.   Roll D100 and if the roll is 96-00 the spirit is hostile, holding some grudge against the characters bloodline and will attack them in Spirit Combat.   Otherwise the Ancestor can covertly possess the character for its POW in minutes. For the duration of this possession it will share its knowledge and magic (see page 108).  ▶   Ironmind  Touch This spell hardens the resolve of the character that it is cast upon for its duration. Each 2 levels of Magnitude of the spell adds a Bonus die (+1B) to all Persistence tests against magical attacks to the mind (e.g.   Fear, Befuddle etc.) or opposed tests vs Influence.  ▶   Knock Back  Instant, Resist (Resilience) On a failed resistance roll the target of this spell is knocked back a number of metres equal to the spell’s magnitude.  ▶   Knockdown  Instant, Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Resist (Resilience) On a failed resistance roll the target of this spell is knocked down prone.  ▶   Leap  Touch, Resist (Dodge) This spell causes the target to leap 2m up in the air for each point of Magnitude. If cast upon an unwilling target, who fails their resistance roll, they will then fall to earth taking normal falling damage (see page 80).  ▶   Levitating Disc  Concentration, Area 1 per Magnitude This spell creates an invisible disc 1m in diameter for each point of Magnitude. It can carry weight equivalent to one person and their belongings per point of Magni- tude, and moves at twice the Magnitude in metres per combat round. So for example, a Levitating Disc with Magnitude 3 can carry 3 people, is 3m in diameter, and moves at a rate of 6m per combat round.  ▶   Light  Magnitude 1, Non-Variable, Area 10 When cast on a physical object (including living ma- terial), this spell causes the object to shed light across the area of effect.   The spell illuminates only the spec- ified area – everything outside the area of effect is not lit. This spell creates raw light, not a flame.  ▶   Lock  Touch, Permanent This spell adds a resistance to being opened to a lock equal to the spell’s Magnitude x 10%.   The item must have a lock, such as might be found on a door or a chest, and the spell is focused on that lock. Once the lock has been forced/picked the spell ends.  ▶   Mindspeech  This spell can affect one target for every point of Magnitude. It allows telepathy between the caster and any target, though targets will not have telepathy with one another. The words transmitted by telepathy must be whispered and will be heard directly in the head of the recipient, in the same language in which it was spoken.  ▶   Mobility  For every point of Magnitude of this spell, the tar- get’s Movement Rate will be increased by 2m.  ▶   Multi Attack  Instant Each point of Magnitude allows the caster to make one extra close-combat attack. These attacks happen in a blur of motion at the same Combat Order that the normal attack occurs. Each casting of the spell grants a single flurry of such attacks.  ▶   Multi Missile  Trigger If the caster succeeds in casting the spell, a missile is charged with the spell for ten minutes. A missile un- der the effects of Multi Missile cannot benefit from Fire Missile or Speedart. When the enchanted missile is fired/thrown, one ad- ditional magical missile is created for every point of Mag- nitude.   Each magical missile’s attack is rolled for sep- arately and each does the same damage as the original (though they will not benefit from the character’s dam- age modifier).   Magical missiles created through Multi Missile will not cause critical hits, though the original missile can. Magical missiles created through Multi Mis- sile will affect creatures that can only be hurt by magic.  45 Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 48 ===

▶   Noxious Vapours  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Area 10, Resist (Resilience) This spell fills a volume 10 metres in radius with thick choking green gas.   Any living creature that breathes oxygen who fails Resilience test takes 1D4 damage per round and is incapacitated due to heavy coughing. Next round make a Resilience test to see if they compose themselves enough to overcome the incapacitating cough- ing,.They still take 1D4 damage every round that they are in the cloud.   The cloud also obscures vision, pro- viding any creature within it with cover, so that ranged attackers are at two Penalty dice (-2P) to their attack roll and that any melee in the cloud is at a Penalty die (-1P).  ▶   Personal Insight  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable This spell gives the caster or recipient a very direct insight into a small question directly relevant to them, in the form of an internal intuition. For example the question “Why can I not harm the creature?”   would get the answer “Because your sword is not enchanted”, while “Why can we not harm the creature?” would not get an answer.  ▶   Pierce  Touch This spell can be cast on any weapon with a blade or point.   For every point of Magnitude, it ignores one armour point when it strikes armour. Pierce can bypass magical armour as easily as normal armour.  ▶   Protection  For every point of Magnitude of this spell one ar- mour point is added to the armour of the target. This stacks with any existing armour and is treated in the same way.  ▶   Push/Pull  Instant, Resist (Resilience) This spell allows the caster to move an item of up to 3 SIZ or ENC per point of Magnitude either towards or away from them in a straight line, as if pushed suddenly from one direction or the other. The item is not moved with significant enough force to inflict damage unless it is naturally damaging (a bottle of acid, for instance). The caster has no control over the distance pushed or pulled, as this depends on the location of the item or the surface it rests on. Living creatures targeted by this spell are allowed a Resilience roll to resist.  ▶   Read Emotion  Magnitude 1, Non-Variable, Instant, Resist (Persistence) This spell when cast tells you what the true emo- tional state of the target is, if they fail a Persistence roll.  ▶   Resist (Element)  This spell adds a Bonus die (+1B) to Resistance tests against hostile effects, magic or otherwise, from a given element (Air/Darkness/Earth/Fire/Water) per 2 Mag- nitude, and subtracts 2 points of damage from that ele- ment per Magnitude.  ▶   Restore Energy  Instant, Touch Each point of this spell’s Magnitude instantly re- stores one fatigue level to the recipient.  ▶   Sap Energy  Instant, Touch, Resist (Resilience) Each point of this spell’s Magnitude inflicts adds one fatigue level to the target upon a failed Persistence roll.  ▶   Scare  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Resist (Persistence) On a failed resistance roll, the target is scared for 1D6 rounds. Scared targets must withdraw from combat with the caster for the duration of the spell, and move as quickly as they are able, directly away from the caster.  ▶   Second Sight  Magnitude 3, Non-Variable Second Sight allows the caster to gauge the POW of every creature and magic item within range. The spell is blocked by anything that blocks normal vision.   The caster will know if each aura created by the illuminated POW is less than his own POW, within three points of his own POW or greater than his own POW. Additionally, Second Sight provides a Bonus die (+1B) on Perception tests to notice hidden magical items or hiding people or creatures. Second Sight will also reveal invisible entities; though only a hazy image will show (treat such targets as partially obscured).  ▶   Skybolt  Magnitude 3, Non-Variable, Instant, Resist (Dodge)  46   Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 49 ===

The caster summons a lightning bolt from the heav- ens regardless of the weather. The target must be out- doors in plain view. Skybolt inflicts 2D6 points of dam- age to a single chosen target.   Only magical Armour Points offer protection against this damage.  ▶   Slip  Magnitude 1, Non-Variable, Resist (Dodge) The caster makes the ground under the target’s feet as slippery as a sheet of black ice. The target must make an Athletics roll or fall over prone.  ▶   Slow  Resist (Resilience) For every point of Magnitude of this spell the tar- get’s Movement Rate will be decreased by 2m.   A tar- get’s Movement may not be reduced to below one metre through use of this spell.  ▶   Speedart  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Touch, Trigger Cast on a missile this spell is triggered when it is fired.   It gives a Bonus die (+1B) to Ranged Combat and +3 damage while using the missile. A missile under the effects of Speedart cannot benefit from Fire Missile or Multi Missile.  ▶   Spirit Alarm  If any spirit crosses the boundary of the area this spell is cast upon, the caster is aware of it.   This spell does not detect the type or number of spirits that violate the ward. Each level of Magnitude of the spell protects a five metre square area.  ▶   Spirit Bane  Magnitude 2, Touch For every two points of Magnitude this spell increases the spiritual damage a character causes during Spirit Combat by one step (so a 1D4 becomes a D6, a D6 be- comes a D8 and so forth), Persistence is also increased by a Bonus die (+1B) per two points of Magnitude.  ▶   Spirit Binding Ritual  Permanent This spell must be cast on an item called a Fetish or an unintelligent natural animal with a SIZ no greater than twice the POW of the binder, which is known as a familiar. This spell allows a spirit that has been defeated in Spirit Combat by being reduced to 0 Power Points to be bound into the item or animal and be forced into the service of the caster of the spell.   The item or familiar must be at hand as the spirit is defeated, so that the Spirit can be bound into it. The bound spirit has limited perception and abilities as listed below.   The spell cost only 1 PP to cast per Spirit Bound in a Fetish and 2 PP for a Familiar, but the act of binding a spirit cost 1 Improvement Point for a Fetish and 2 for a Familiar.  Retained Powers   The bound spirit retains its INT, POW and CHA, It also retains any memories or knowl- edge it had before it was bound.   It also possesses any skills it had in its spiritual form, such as Lore. The Spirit’s Persistence, remains the same as before. Dodge is recalculated if appropriate.  Spirit Bond   A bound spirit is forced into loyalty by the ritual. The bond also creates a spiritual link between the Binder and Spirit, this allows them to communi- cate telepathically over a distance equal to the Binder POW in kilometers.  Spirit Perception   All bound spirits can sense other Spirits within a range equal to its POW in metres. The spirit can tell if they are bound or discorporate and what type of spirit.  Cast Magic   The owner of a Bound Spirit can force the spirit to cast any Magic that the Spirit knows, using its own Power Points.   The skill to cast the Magic is equal to the skill of the Bound Spirit and not the controlling character. If the spirit uses Divine Magic then it cannot regain its Divine Spells once they are used, until it is released.  Magic Reservoir   The binder of the spirit can draw upon its Power Points to cast their spells and ritu- als, but if their Bound Spirit is reduced to 0 Power Points it is automatically released.  47 Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 50 ===

Physical Limitations   A bound spirit cannot talk, ex- cept telepathically with its holder, unless it has appro- priate magic such as Mindspeech. Spirits bound into Fetishes cannot move.  Familiar Abilities   An animal that has been turned into a Familiar has all of the usual abilities of that creature (an otter can swim, an eagle can fly and a horse can be ridden), Initially for 1D6 days after the Familiar is created it suffers a Penalty die (-1P) to all its abilities, as the Spirit becomes accustomed to its new body. A Gamemaster may rule that a Bound Spirit could learn special skills, for example a Bound Spirit in a Parrot could talk, a Monkey could write or an Eagle scratch letters into wood to communicate.  Physical Form   The bound spirit has Hit Points equal to the familiar or Fetish that it is bound into. If the familiar is killed or the Fetish is broken then the spirit is instantly freed and returns to the Spirit World.  Spirit Combat   A Bound Spirit cannot initiate spirit combat, but may be attacked by another Spirit or Shaman in the normal manner. A Bound Spirit driven to 0 Power Points is sent back to the Spirit Plane and cannot be rebound. A Bound Spirit defends with its original Spirit Damage rating.  Releasing Bound Spirits   A Bound Spirit can be re- leased by its captor at any time or by the ways listed above.  Special Powers   There are many different types of spirit. The Gamemaster may allow at their discretion for each type of spirit to manifest its innate powers in the Fetish or Familiar into which is to bound. A disease spirit may make the animal immune to disease, but become an active carrier.   A Pain Spirit may cause a sword to invoke crippling pain against opponents. The manifestation of this ability may cost additional PPs or Improvement Points.  Limit to Bound Spirits   Unless the player is a Shaman they can only have Bound Spirits equal to ¼ of their POW. A Shaman can have spirits equal to ½ their POW. If the captors POW drops then this limit changes and the character will be automatically be forced to choose which spirits to lose.  Binding Guardian Spirits   When a Guardian is bound to a post it is given a set of conditions as to when it is to attack opponents, the first condition is free, but each subsequent one cost one Improvement Point. All conditions must include a termination point.   Typi- cal conditions include: you must guard this gate until the temple falls or you must watch over this Tomb for a hundred years or you must guard this child until he becomes a man. Guardian spirits remain at their post until the conditions are broken or the spirit is de- feated and returned to the Spirit World. They do not count as part of the binders limit to Bound Spirits, but no character may bind more than ½ their POW in Guardians.  ▶   Spirit Shield  Magnitude 2 This spell forms a magical barrier that protects the caster from Power Point loss as the result of a success- ful attack during Spirit Combat (see page 49).   Each two points of Magnitude reduces the damage done by an attacking spirit by one point.  ▶   Strength  Touch For every two points of Magnitude of this spell, the target’s Damage increases by +2 and strength based ath- letics tests gain a Bonus die (+1B). Note the Damage increase is not treated as magical damage.  ▶   Talk to Animal  Magnitude 3, Non-Variable With this spell the recipient is able to talk to any beast within ten metres of them.   This communication is verbal, therefore the recipient must be able to speak and be heard by the target animal.  ▶   Thunder’s Voice  Magnitude 2 This spell grants the caster a thunderous voice of command. For every 2 points of Magnitude of this spell, the caster has a Bonus die (+1B) added to his Influence skill and can also be heard at up to the spell’s Magnitude x 100 in metres.  48   Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 51 ===

▶   Tongues (Language)  Magnitude 3, Non-Variable This spell allows the recipient to speak another lan- guage perfectly for its duration.  ▶   Truth Seeker  Instant This spell grants the caster a Bonus die (+1B) per 2 points of Magnitude to their next Skill Test they make to discover lies, secrets or hidden objects. It does not stack with any other spell-effect bonuses.  ▶   Unlock  Touch, Instant This spell has a chance of opening a lock equal to the spell’s Magnitude x 20%. If cast on a lock that has had a Lock spell cast on it, the test is an Opposed Test vs the Magnitude x 20% of the Lock spell.  ▶   Vigour  Touch For every point of Magnitude of this spell, the tar- get’s Hit Points score increases by +2.   A target can- not have its Hit Points increased in this way to more than twice its original score. Damage is taken from the ‘magical’ Hit Points first, so when the spell dissipates the damage that was inflicted on the magical Hit Points disappears too.   The Major Wounds level needs to be recalculated appropriately.  ▶   Vomit  Resist (Resilience) This spell incapacitates its Victim for 1 round per point of Magnitude, due to uncontrollable vomiting. On a fumbled resilience roll the Victim takes 1D6 Hit Points damage.  ▶   Walk on (Element)  Magnitude 3 This spell allows the recipient to walk on the speci- fied element (Air/Darkness/Earth/Fire/Water) without sinking or taking any harm from what is being walked on for the spell’s duration. With this spell for the appropri- ate element, the caster can walk across lava, quicksand, water, or even through the air.   Each additional point of Magnitude increases the duration of the spell by 1 minute.  ▶   Water Breath  Touch This spell allows the target to breathe water for the duration of the spell. For every point of Magnitude, one additional person can breathe water, or the duration is increased by one minute. Water Breath does not affect on the target’s ability to breathe air.  ▶   Weapon Enhance  Touch This spell can be cast on any close combat weapon or any unarmed attack. For every 2 points of Magnitude, it increases the chance to hit with the weapon by a Bonus die (+1B) and deals two points of extra damage.   This extra damage is magical and will affect creatures that can only be hurt by magic. The weapon’s base damage remains non-magical. A weapon under the effects of this spell cannot benefit from Fire Weapon.  7.3 Spirits  Spirits are supernatural beings of deceased sentient be- ings that for some reason did not pass in the Spirit World.   They instead linger in the physical world as translucent figures or sometimes completely invisible. They can only be interacted with using spells (see previous section) unless the spirits initiate combat with a character to possess them.  7.3.1   ⋆   Spirit Combat  In cases of aggressive spirits Spirit Combat will occur. This is the clash of spiritual energies, each trying to over- come and dominate the other.  ▶   Combat Process  Resolve Spirit Combat using an opposed skill check.  If also part of physical combat, then spirit combat occurs instantaneously in real-time.   Resolve the spirit combat in its entirety before continuing with the rest of the combat round.   Only magic spells related to Spirit Combat can be used.  Use the spirit’s Spirit Combat for the opposed skill check.  Player characters use either Persistence skill.  The combatant who loses the spirit combat test loses 1D6 Power Points, minus the magnitude of any Spirit Shield or similar protective magic they may have cast upon them.  The more powerful a spirit is, the more damage it does. For every ten points of POW above 20 a spirit combatant gains an extra +1D6 to the dam- age they do in spirit combat.  49 Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 52 ===

If a combatant’s Power Points are 0 or less, it loses the combat.   If the loser is a mortal with a body and the spirit is capable of possession, the loser becomes possessed by the spirit. If the loser is the spirit it is banished and flees into the depths of the Spirit World.  At any time during Spirit Combat, if one of the combatants wins the contest three times in a row they may break away from the contest.   The op- ponent may not engage in Spirit Combat again for the victors POW in minutes.  7.3.2   ⋆   Spirit Possession  Possession is when a spirit steals or inhabits a corporeal body for its own ends. All forms of possessing spirits can be driven out by Divine Magic spell Exorcism, the Folk Magic spell Drive out Spirits or similar magics.   There are two types of possession:  ▶   Covert  This type of possession has the spirit hide in the victim’s body. It only assumes partial control of the victim when it needs to do something to the victim’s body. This is the form of possession typically used by Healing and Disease spirits. It is also the form of possession used by Ancestor Spirits.  ▶   Dominant  The spirit takes full control of the victim’s body and in turn the victim’s spirit is imprisoned in the body, un- able to do anything until the hostile spirit is exorcised or leaves.   This is the most dangerous form of posses- sion, as the spirit often cares nothing for the body it inhabits, for once the body dies the spirit returns to its old existence, in most cases, and possession by a suicidal ghost or homicidal demon is never good for the body in question.  7.4 Creating Magic Items  Most magic items found in play in a game of Fantasy Crux will have been created by the characters or Non Player Character magicians. Although the spells that their characters use to create magic items are detailed in their respective spell lists, its worth providing a summary here.  Create Charms   This is the basic spell for creating magic items. Use this spell to create rune-inscribed swords, paper talismans that protect against spirits, and dragon skin armour that is resistant to fire (via a Resist Fire spell).  Create Power Point Store   If you want to create a magic item that has Power Points already stored, so the user doesn’t have to use their own, this is the spell to use.  Create Potions   This is a quick way of making non- reusable spell stores where you’ve already spent the power points, for you or your allies to gulp down for instant effect during a combat. Think Heal + Create Potions and you have the classic Healing Potion.  7.4.1   ⋆   Identify a Magic Item  There is no catch all “Detect Magical Properties” or “Know Magic item” skill in Fantsy Crux. This is quite deliberate, keeping with the general policy that such items are not the equivalent of magical shotguns.   Some options are: Consult a Sage or other magical expert. This option will cost the characters lots of money.   Take a baseline of one hundred silvers per point of spell magnitude or some perilous quest that the character must do in re- turn. Such experts are rare, because most high ranking magicians have little time for magical research for others, and would be more interested in their own schemes. Detect Folk Magic spells. This merely tells you the item is magical.   A critical casting may tell the caster how powerful the item is. Trial and error.   The character tries to find out the item’s use by experiment. Allow creative and imagina- tive plans to reveal partially what the item does. Researching the myths and legends around the item. This is the most certain way of finding out what a magic item does. Of course such myths may be obscure them- selves, requiring a dangerous adventure to a long hidden repository of knowledge to find.  50   Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 53 ===

CHAPTER 8  Arcane Magic  Arcane Magic is an approach to magic that acknowl- edges that there are magical rules that govern the Uni- verse and that by studying these rules a Magician can manipulate reality to his will. Often Arcane Magic is atheistic, regarding gods and spirits as merely intelligent forces of the Universe, that exist to be interacted with and dealt with on an equal footing. Practitioners of Arcane Magic develop in one of two ways.   The majority are organised into schools of wiz- ardry, which have their own books of spells and rules that they teach their apprentices. Alternatively, there is a long tradition of practitioners working in solitude, cut off from other Arcane Magic users and society at large, to focus purely on their magical activities. Occasionally they take on an apprentice, to teach their art, or simply as a helping hand around the magical laboratory.  8.1 Arcane Magic Ranks  Some schools may have ranks but that will depend on the specific campaign. Regardless, the skill increase bestows certain benefits.  Apprentices:   Students of Arcane Magic who will only know a couple of spells at an Arcane Magic Casting skill of 26% to 50%. Apprentices can spend two Im- provement Points to create Arcane Crystals. An Ar- cane Crystal focuses up to one spell that the character knows per ten points of Arcane Magic Casting. These spells can be changed in the downtime between adven- tures, and have a star placed against the spell name on the character sheet to show they are focused.   Spells that are focused by the Arcane Crystal increase the character’s Arcane Magic Casting (Bonus die (+1B) when used to all casting tests). The character is aware of where the Crystal is at all times and the enchant- ments placed upon it make it indestructible to non- magical means.  Mages:   Graduates of the schools of wizardry or equiv- alent.   They will know between five and ten spells, and will have an Arcane Magic Casting skill rang- ing from 51% to 90%.   Mages can choose to spend two Improvements Points to create an Arcane Power Store item that allows storing up to POW additional Power Points. It can be any item, like a staff, medal- lion, ring, sword, etc. The character is aware of where this item is at all times and the enchantments placed upon the Arcane Power Store makes it indestructible to non-magical means.  Archmages:   Acknowledged masters of Arcane Magic. They will have at least ten spells and an Arcane Magic Casting skill of 90%+. Archmages can choose to spend two additional Improvement Points to improve their Arcane Power Store item to store a maximum of POWx2 Power Points. An Archmage with Arcane Magic mas- tery can spend two Improvement Points to Transcend.  8.1.1   ⋆   Transcendence  The Archmage has such high knowledge of the laws of Arcane Magic that they are no longer part of the Real World. Their body changes from a physical one, based upon CON and SIZ with hit points, to one based on pure magical energy, based upon POW and power points.  ▶   Requirements  Arcane Magic Casting at 101%.  POW at maximum (21 for humans).  Must know 10 different Arcane Magic spells.  ▶   Benefits  They are immune to disease and poison, unless they specifically target POW or power points, and  51 Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 54 ===

instead of taking damage to hit points, they take them to power points.  Spells which heal a physical body, such as Heal, Treat Wounds, and Divine Heal, do not work on the Archmage’s new magical form.   Instead, an Archmage will transfer stored power points, such as those held in their Arcane Power Store, back into their magical body.   This takes one combat round and is an action that requires full concen- tration to complete.  Defensive spells that protect against physical harm, such as Damage Resistance, still do so.   As does physical armour, although an Archmage is more likely to use magical means to protect themselves.  The character no longer ages physically and is con- sidered immortal. For many player characters, Transcending is the end of their story in-game, with the player retiring the char- acter from play. If the player has ideas of how the Tran- scended character can continue, they should discuss that with their Gamemaster to work out further adventures. Most non-player character Transcended Masters choose to withdraw from the Real World, using their new magi- cal body to explore Other Worlds and the other avenues of magical power that open up to them.   They often maintain a link with the Real World, where favoured students can contact them for sentimental reasons.  8.2 Spot Rules  8.2.1   ⋆   Learning Arcane Magic  Arcane Magic is governed by the Arcane Magic Cast- ing skill. The base chance for Arcane Magic Casting is INT. Spells are learnt separately, but the Arcane Magic Casting skill determines the success for casting all Ar- cane Magic spells. Characters learn Arcane Magic from other characters who know the practice.   It costs eight Improvement Points to get access to the Arcane Magic discipline.   The character gains the Mystic Vision spell for free.  8.2.2   ⋆   Learning Spells  Before a spell can be cast using Arcane Magic, the fol- lowing process must be followed:   The character must first learn the spell through research. In order to learn a particular Arcane Magic spell, the caster must possess the spell in written form or be taught by a teacher. In game terms this means having access to a teacher who knows the spell or a book or scroll where it is written down. The player then spends two Improvement Points and writes the spell down on their character sheet. Once the Arcane Magic spell has been learned, the character will be ready to try casting it.  8.2.3   ⋆   Casting Spells  A character must be able to gesture with his hands, and be able to chant, in order to cast a spell.   Whenever a spell is cast using Arcane Magic, there will always be a sight and sound that nearby creatures can detect, be it a flash of light, a crack of thunder, or a shimmering in the air. The exact effects are up to the Gamemaster and Player to decide, but will automatically be detected by any creatures within 10 metres per Magnitude of the spell. Casting an Arcane Magic spell requires a successful skill test using the Arcane Magic Casting skill.   If suc- cessful, the spell takes effect. If the casting test fails, the spell does not take effect.  ▶   Power Points  All Arcane Magic spells cost a base of one Power Point to cast.   Arcane Magic spells can be modifying as the caster wishes (if he has the appropriate Power Points). If a Manipulation effect is applied to a spell, each effect costs one Power Point to apply (see below).  The result of the Arcane Magic casting test depends on its success:  Success:   A number of Power Points are deducted from the spellcaster’s total, equal to the Manipulation ef- fects Power Points plus one of the spell.   The spell then takes effect.  Failure:   The spell does not take effect and the character loses one Power Point for the base spell cost.  Critical:   Any attempt to resist or counter the spell suf- fers a Penalty die (-1P). Moreover, only the base cost of one Power Point is lost (not for any Manipulations).  Fumble:   The spell fails and the Arcane Magic user loses 1D6 Power Points in addition to normal Power Point loss.  52   Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 55 ===

Power Points   Magnitude   Duration   Range  1 (Default)   1   5 minutes   10m +1   2   15 minutes   20m +2   3   30 minutes   40m +3   4   1 hour   80m +4   5   2 hours   160m +5   6   4 hours   320m +6   7   12 hours   640m +7   8   1 day   1km +8   9   2 day   2km +9   10   5 day   5km +10   11   1 week   10km +11   12   2 weeks   20km +12   13   1 month   50km +13   14   2 months   100km +14   15   3 months   200km +15   16   6 months   500km +16   17   1 year   1000km +17   18   2 years   2000km +18   19   5 years   5000km +19   20   10 years   10000km  Table 8.1: Arcane Magic Manipulations  ▶   Casting Time  No other Combat Action may be taken while casting a spell, though the character may slowly walk up to half their Movement. A spell takes effect at the end of its casting, which starts at the beginning of the Combat Round and ends on the caster’s Combat Order. Note that while spellcast- ing, a character will draw possible attacks from enemies they are adjacent to during a Combat Round. Distractions or attacks on the spellcaster as he casts will either automatically ruin the spell (if the spellcaster is blinded or suffers a Major Wound) or require Persis- tence tests for them to maintain concentration on the spell.  ▶   Spell Manipulations  Arcane Magic spells have three basic effects which can be manipulated by the caster: Magnitude, Duration, and Range. Each effect has a default value which the spell can be cast at, costing one Power Point. The default value for the spell effects are listed in table 8.1. The tens value of the caster’s Arcane Magic Casting skill determines the max number of additional Power Points that can be spent on each of the manipulation types. Example  Omar the Magnificent with an Arcane Magic Casting skill of 80% can spend an additional 8 Power Points on manipulating each of the spell’s effects, in Magnitude, Duration and Range. That’s a manipulation of up to 8 levels for each effect, not 8 levels in total across all three effects.  The decision of which effects to manipulate and how many extra Power Points are to be spent is made before the spell is cast. Example  Lura casts Damage Boosting on Rurik’s sword, and wants it to be at a magnitude of 4 for an hour. She has an Arcane Magic Casting skill of 60%, which means she can spend an additional six Power Points on manipulating any spell’s effects.   Looking at the Manipulation table, Lura can comfortably manage a Magnitude of 4, for three additional Power Points, and can manage a duration of an hour with another three points. Lura’s player rolls the dice and compares the result against Lura’s casting skill of 60% to see whether she successful casts the spell. In fact Lura, can spend a maximum of six points on a magnitude of range 640m, another six on a duration of 12 hours and another 6 on a magnitude of 7, which is a total of 19 Power Points (18 for the manipulations and 1 for the spell itself).  ▶   Dismissing Spells  In a single Combat Round, a caster can dismiss any Per- manent spell(s) he has cast, as a free action. Ceasing to cast a Concentration spell is immediate and not an ac- tion.  ▶   Extra Power Points  As you can probably work out from the example above, it is possible for an Arcane Magic user to cast a spell which needs more Power Points in its manipulated form than an Arcane Magic user will normally have. Arcane Magic users get round this by carrying either Power Point stores (see Folk Magic spell Create Magic Store) or other arti- facts that can store Power Points (e.g. from other disci- plines).  8.2.4   ⋆   Spell Traits  All Arcane Magic spells share the same basic qualities:  Base Magnitude of one  Duration of 5 minutes, and  Range of 10 metres.  53 Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 56 ===

Other traits used by spells are detailed below.  Concentration:   The spell’s effects will remain in place as long as the character concentrates on it.   Concen- trating on a spell is functionally identical to casting the spell, requiring the spell caster to continue to ges- ture with both arms, chant and ignore distractions. This trait overrides the normal Arcane Magic spell default Duration.  Instant:   The spell’s effects take place instantly.   The spell itself then disappears. This trait overrides the normal Arcane Magic spell default Duration.  Permanent:   The spell’s effects remain in place until they are dispelled or dismissed. This trait overrides the normal Arcane Magic spell default Duration.  Resist (Dodge/Persistence/Resilience):   The spell’s intended effects do not succeed automatically.   The target may make a Dodge, Persistence or Resilience test (as specified by the spell) in order to avoid the effect of the spell entirely. Note that Resist (Dodge) spells require the target to be able to use Reactions in order to Dodge. In the case of Area spells, the Resist (Dodge) trait requires the target to dive in order to mitigate the spell’s effect.  Touch:   Touch spells require the character to actually touch his target for the spell to take effect, using an Unarmed skill test to make contact.  8.3 Spells  ▶   Animate (Substance)  Concentration This spell allows the caster to animate the substance indicated, up to one SIZ for every point of Magnitude. The caster can cause it to move about and interact clum- sily (Movement of 1m per three points of Magnitude). The caster’s chance to have the animated object per- form any physical skill successfully is equal to his own chance to perform that action halved (before any modi- fiers). If the appropriate Form/Set spell is cast immedi- ately after this spell, the caster can perform much finer manipulation of the object.   In this case, the animated object will use the caster’s full skill scores for physical activities. This spell can only be used on inanimate matter.  ▶   Cast Back  This protective spell offers a chance of sending hos- tile spells (Arcane Magic and Folk Magic) back to the attacking spell caster. Cast Back only affects spells that target the user specifically and have the Resist trait.   Such spells may affect the protected character normally, but if it is re- sisted, the spell is launched back at the person who cast it, as long as its Magnitude is not greater than the Cast Back’s Magnitude.  ▶   Create Familiar  Permanent This spell allows the caster to make a personal sac- rifice in order to create a Familiar.   The Nature of the Familiar is dependent on the setting, but the spell typ- ically only works on a non-sentient animal.   The spell takes one hour to perform. The typical cost of ingredi- ents for the spell is 100 Gold Pieces and it requires 3 Improvement Points.  An Arcane Magic user can have up to one Familiar for every ten points of Power they have.  A Familiar uses the animal as the template for stats.  A Familiar gains sentience when created equal to 2D6 INT and Power equal to 2D6 POW, unless the animal had a higher score, in which case that POW is used.  A Familiar has a permanent mental connection with its master;   with a range equal to 1/2 the caster’s POW in kilometres. Through this link the Familiar can allow the caster to ‘see’ through its perceptual abilities.   The Arcane Magic user can cast spells on the Familiar as if touching it and the Familiar can cast any spells it knows on its master.  A Familiar’s characteristics, skills and magic can be increased by the player spending Improvement Points, as they would for the character.  When a Familiar is destroyed or killed the Arcane Magic user loses 1D6 Hit Points from the trauma. Half the Improvement Points spent on the famil- iar return to the character’s pool of Improvement Points.  ▶   Damage Boosting  Touch This spell can be cast upon any weapon up to five ENC. Each point of Magnitude adds one point to the weapon’s damage (the basic spell will increase a hatchet from 1D6 damage to 1D6+1 damage, for instance).  ▶   Damage Resistance  Touch This spell protects the body of the recipient.   Any incoming attack dealing damage equal to or less than the Magnitude of the spell is ignored. Any incoming attack dealing more damage than the Magnitude of Damage Resistance is unaffected and will deal its full damage  54   Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 57 ===

as normal. Note that the protected character may still suffer from Knockback if applicable.  ▶   Diminish (Characteristic)  Resist(Persistence/Resilience), Touch There are actually seven Diminish spells, one for each Characteristic. The spell will temporarily apply a penalty to the specified Characteristic equal to the Magnitude of the spell. The penalty applied by this spell may not reduce a Characteristic below one and a creature must have the Characteristic in question to be affected by this spell. Diminish (STR, DEX, CON and SIZ) are resisted with Resilience.   Diminish (INT, POW and CHA) are resisted with Persistence. Applying a penalty to POW does not reduce the character’s Power Points. Note that not all uses of this spell are malicious. Thieves and others often value the timely use of a Di- minish (SIZ) spell, as it can greatly enhance their ability to enter restricted areas.  ▶   Dominate (Species)  Resist(Persistence) This spell allows the caster to gain control over a creature belonging to a specific species.   If the target fails to resist the spell, it must obey the commands of the caster for the duration of the spell. The controlled creature shares a telepathic link with the caster by which it can receive its orders. If the caster and the creature dominated do not share a common lan- guage, the caster can order it about by forming a mental image of the actions they wish the dominated creature to perform.  ▶   Energy Projection (Type)  Ranged, Instant, Resist(Dodge) Energy is either projected as a beam or a ball towards the target, which can avoid the attack by Dodging. If the spell takes effect the target takes damage equal to double the Magnitude of the spell. Physical Armour does not protect against the damage, but magical protec- tion does. Types of energy that can be projected by this spell are Cold (Dark), Lightning, Heat (Fire), Shards of Rock (Earth), Windblast (Air).  ▶   Enhance (Characteristic)  Touch There are actually seven Enhance spells, one for each Characteristic.   Essentially the reverse of the Diminish spell, Enhance allows the caster to temporarily apply a bonus to the specified Characteristic equal to the Mag- nitude of the spell.   A creature must have the Charac- teristic in question to be affected by this spell. Applying a bonus to POW does not increase the char- acter’s Power Points.  ▶   Fly  Concentration, Resist (Persistence) Using this spell allows the caster (or whomever or whatever he targets with the spell) to fly.   The caster may levitate a number of objects or characters (the caster counting as one of these characters if he so wishes). A levitated character may not be Overloaded and must have a SIZ Characteristic which is lower than the caster’s POW characteristic. Objects must have an ENC lower than the caster’s POW characteristic. Characters or objects moved by this spell have a base Movement Rate of 6m. All objects and characters moved by this spell move at the spellcaster’s behest, not their own. Each point of the spell’s Magnitude may either be used to increase the target’s Movement by +2m or to target an additional object or character – but not both. An Arcane Magic user casting this spell at Magnitude 4 may fly himself with a Movement of 12m, fly himself and a friend with a Movement of 8m each, or fly himself and three friends with a Movement of 6m each.  ▶   Form/Set (Substance)  Instant There are an unlimited number of Form/Set spells in existence, one for every substance imaginable, from steel to smoke to water. Each point of Magnitude allows the caster to shape one ENC of solid substance or one cubic metre of an  55 Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 58 ===

ethereal substance (like darkness). The caster must be Familiar with the shape he is forming. When the caster has finished the forming process, the substance retains its shape.   Rigid substances like steel will hold the form they had at the end of the spell, while more mutable substances like water will immediately lose their shape. This spell can be used to mend damage done to an object. The caster must form the entire object and must succeed at an appropriate Craft test. If successful he will restore the item to its original condition. This spell can only be used on inanimate substances.  ▶   Glow  This spell causes a glowing point of light to appear on a solid substance. At its base, the spell creates an area of light one metre in radius, giving off the same illumi- nation as a candle. Each additional point of Magnitude increases the radius of effect by one metre.   At Magni- tude 3, the brightness of the spell increases to that of a flaming brand at its centre. At Magnitude 5, it increases to that of a campfire and at Magnitude 10 to that of a bonfire. This spell can be cast on an opponent’s eyes. If cast on a living being the spell also gains the Resist (Dodge) trait. If the target fails to resist it, he will suffer a penalty to all attack, parry and Dodge tests, as well as any skills relying upon vision, equal to five times the spell’s Mag- nitude, until the spell ends or is dispelled.  ▶   Hamper  Resist (Resilience) Each point of Magnitude of Hamper subtracts 1m from the Movement rate of the target. Every two points of Magnitude also subtracts 1 from the recipient’s Com- bat Order.  ▶   Haste  Each point of Magnitude of Haste adds 1m to the Movement rate of the recipient.   Every two points of Magnitude also adds +1 to the recipient’s Combat Or- der.  ▶   Holdfast  Touch This spell causes two adjacent ten centimetre by ten centimetre surfaces (roughly the size of a man’s palm) to commingle into one. The basic bond has a STR of 1. Each additional point of Magnitude will either increase the STR of the bond by +1 or double the area affected. This spell can affect organic and inorganic substances. If the caster is attempting to bond a living being with this spell, the spell gains the Resist (Resilience) trait.  ▶   Make Scroll  Permanent These are written items which store Arcane Magic Spells. All scrolls have an attached cost of 2 Gold Pieces per magnitude of spell in ingredients for special inks/parch- ments, etc. The resulting scroll is a one-use item which, upon a successful Arcane Magic Casting test, casts the spell(s) with any manipulations, at the magnitude that was cast on the scroll. Alternatively, upon a successful Arcane Magic Cast- ing the reader of the scroll can learn the spell by spending the appropriate number of Improvement Points. Either way, upon a successful use of the scroll, the spell fades from the scroll.   If the casting roll merely fails the spell remains, but the reader can not attempt to use the scroll until their Arcane Magic Casting skill increases.   If the casting roll is fumbled the spell fades from the scroll, without any benefit to the reader.  ▶   Make Spell Matrix  Permanent This spell creates items that store Arcane Magic spells. The enchanter pays 2 Improvement Point per spell stored in the matrix. All spell matrices have an attached cost of 20 Gold Pieces per spell in special materials. The wielder can cast and manipulate the spell at the skill of the original enchanter, using their own Power Points as fuel. Spell matrices are mundane items in their own right and if the item is broken, then the spell is dispelled. However at the time of enchantment the enchanter can spend another Improvement Point to magically harden the item, making it indestructible to non-magical means.  ▶   Mirage  Touch This spell creates an illusion based on all five senses. The illusion will seem real and solid unless the person looking at it succeeds in a Perception test. If the viewer succeeds in a Perception test and the Illusion could usu- ally cause damage if believed in, it can no longer cause damage to that character.   As soon as a viewer disbe- lieves the illusion it becomes insubstantial and ghost-like to him. The Size and the strength of the illusion is governed by the Magnitude. A Magnitude 1 Illusion creates ob- jects or creatures up to SIZ 10 and viewers have three  56   Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 59 ===

Bonus dice (+3B) to their Perception modifier test to disbelieve the illusion.   For every extra Magnitude the caster can choose to either increase the size by 10 or ap- ply a Penalty die (-1P) to the Perception modifier test. Thus, with 5 Magnitude a caster could create a creature up to SIZ 30 with a Bonus die (+1B) to notice it. A positive Perception modifier means that the illu- sion is slightly fuzzy and unreal round the edges while a negative modifier means that it is indistinguishable from the real thing.  ▶   Mystic Vistion  Concentration This spell allows the recipient to literally see magic. By augmenting the recipient’s natural vision, the spell allows them to see a creature’s Power Points, as well as enchanted items with their own Power Points or spells. The recipient must be able to actually see the creature or object for this spell to work. Mystic Vision also allows a recipient to see into the Spirit World. On a normal success the recipient of the spell will only know roughly how many Power Points an object or creature has (1–10, 11–20, 21–30 and so forth).   On a critical they will know exactly. On a fumble the Game- master should give the player a misleading total. By looking at a spell effect, a recipient of Mystic Vision will automatically be aware of its magical origin (Arcane Magic, Divine Magic or Folk Magic).   By in- creasing the Magnitude of Mystic Vision, the caster can learn more about what he is seeing. Compare the Mag- nitude of Mystic Vision to the Magnitude of any spell that the target is either casting or under the influence of. As long as Mystic Vision’s Magnitude exceeds the other spell’s, the caster will be able to precisely determine the effects of the perceived spell, and a mental image of who cast the spell (if it is not obvious). By looking at an enchanted item, a recipient of Mys- tic Vision will automatically be aware of its gross magical effects (such as the types of enchantment currently on the item).   Each point of Magnitude of Mystic Vision will also determine either the invested POW (and there- fore the relevant strength) of a particular enchantment or a particular condition laid upon an enchantment, at the Gamemaster’s choice.  ▶   Neutralise Magic  Instant This spell allows a caster to neutralise other spells. Neutralise Magic will eliminate a combined Magnitude of spells equal to its own Magnitude, starting with the most powerful affecting the target. If it fails to eliminate the most powerful spell then it will instead target the second- most powerful spell. As soon as Neutralise Magic can no longer dismiss a target’s spells, because all the remaining spell’s Magnitudes are too high, its effects immediately end. Neutralise Magic can be fired as a Reaction, but only when another spell is cast within Neutralise Magic’s Range that the character wishes to counter. A success- ful Neutralise Magic disrupts the other spell and nullifies it.   As long as Neutralise Magic’s Magnitude equals or exceeds the target spell’s Magnitude, the target spell is countered.  ▶   Other World Portal (Other World)  Instant This spell creates a portal to a named Other World. The Magnitude of the spell is the number of creatures (SIZ 12-18) who can use the portal simultaneously. The portal exists as long as the spell is in effect. When the spell’s duration is reached, the portal closes instantly. If the spell casting is fumbled, catastrophic events occur. Here are some example events but the creative Gamemaster is encouraged to create more:  A malignant creature from that Other World goes through the portal and attacks the caster, in an attempt to close the portal.  The caster and all within 10m of them are sucked through the portal, which then promptly closes. Worse the caster is so befuddled that he cannot remember this spell for D20+D4 hours.  The Other World, to which the portal is connected, invades the home reality in a 1D10 km diametre from the portal.   The home reality protects itself by throwing up a magical barrier that lets things into the beachhead but not out.  ▶   Palsy  Resist (Resilience)  57 Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 60 ===

If the caster is able to overcome his target with this spell, he can turn the victim’s own nervous system against them.   The spell will paralyse the target, provided the spell’s Magnitude is greater than the quarter of target’s current Hit Points.  ▶   Poison Antidote  This spell counteracts an antidote to any poison. For the duration of the spell, it reduces any poison’s potency by its magnitude X 5. This is for the chance to resist the poison initially.   If that resistance test is failed, it still reduces the poison’s effective potency by its magnitude X 5.   If cast on a person who is already affected by a poison, they get another chance to resist the poison.  ▶   Protective Sphere  When completed, the Protective Sphere will create a sphere-shaped area of protection with a radius in metres equal to the spell’s Magnitude. If this spell is cast on the ground (or other immovable place) it cannot be moved. If cast on a vehicle (such as the bed of a wagon) or a person, it will move with the target.   After the sphere has been completed any one or all of the following spells can be added to provide the defensive capacities of the Sphere during the duration of the Sphere: Damage Re- sistance, Spell Resistance, Spirit Resistance. The Sphere on its own provides no protection. The Protective Sphere’s perimeter contains the ben- efits of its combined Resistance spell(s). The Protective Sphere only inhibits spells or attacks entering the circle from the outside – attacks or spells originating within the circle are unaffected. Thus a Protective Sphere against spirits would block out outside spirits but have no ef- fect on those already inside its perimeter.   A Protec- tive Sphere against damage or spells would block out incoming attacks/spells, but have no effect on those at- tacks made within the sphere (including attacks target- ing those outside the sphere).  ▶   Regenerate  Concentration Special, Instant, Touch This spell causes a severed or maimed limb to regrow or reattach. Regenerate cannot return a character from the embrace of death. The Magnitude of the spell must equal or exceed the maximum Hit Points lost as a result of the Major Wound taken.   This spell will cause a limb severed by a Major Wound to regrow or, if the detached limb is still present, for the limb to reattach itself to its stump. Regenerate takes a number of minutes equal to the target’s SIZ to reattach a limb, during which time the caster must maintain concentration on the spell.   The Hit Points lost due to the Major Wound are recovered at the end of this period.  ▶   (Sense) Projection  Concentration Each (Sense) Projection spell is a separate spell. Each spell encompasses one of the five base senses but there are also variants for any unusual sensory mechanism ap- propriate to the game world (such as sonar). This spell allows the caster to project one of his senses anywhere within the spell’s Range.   The spell forms an invisible and intangible sensor, some ten centimetres across, which receives the specified type of sensory input and transmits it to the caster.   The sensor can move a number of metres per Combat Round equal to the spell’s Magnitude at the caster’s direction and allows them to use his Perception skill through the sensor. Spells can be cast through the sensor of some Pro- jection spells. For instance, ranged spells require Sight Projection, while touch spells require Touch Projection (and likely Sight Projection too, simply so the caster can find his target efficiently). Characters using Mystic Vision can see the sensor and attack it if they wish, though it is only vulnerable to magic. Magical weapons and spells employed against the sensor will not destroy it but will instead transfer their damage directly to the caster.  ▶   Sense (Substance)  Concentration Eminently useful for finding valuables from afar, this spell has a variation for every substance imaginable. Sense (Substance) will cause all sources of the substance within range of the spell to glow an appropriate colour visible only to the caster – diamonds will gleam like ice, amber will shine like a camp fire and so on. Each point of this spell’s Magnitude allows it to penetrate one metre of rock, wood or dirt. If the source is concealed behind such a material, the surface nearest the caster will glow for a moment. The spell cannot penetrate refined metal, though it can penetrate ore.  ▶   Shapechange (Species) to (Species)  Resist (Resilience), Touch Each Shapechange spell is a separate spell.   Of all spells with multiple variations, the Shapechange spell has the most, comprising a new spell for almost ev- ery combination of creatures imaginable. The spell only works on living things – the dead or inanimate cannot be shapechanged. The Magnitude of the spell must be equal to or greater than the average SIZ of both specified species.   Thus changing a mouse (SIZ 1) into a newt (also SIZ 1) is Magnitude 1. Changing a mouse into a lion (SIZ 19) is Magnitude 19. If the spell is successful, the target will be biologically changed, gaining the STR, DEX, CON and SIZ of its new form. Its INT, POW and CHA are unchanged, and the target retains its memories and abilities (though it  58   Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 61 ===

may be unable to use some of those abilities in its new form).  ▶   Skin of Life  Touch This spell protects the recipient from suffocation by air deprivation, due to such factors as drowning or the Smother spell. Each point of Magnitude will cover three points of SIZ – thus a Magnitude 4 Skin of Life spell would sustain a SIZ 12 creature.  ▶   Smother  Concentration, Resist (Resilience Special) If successful, this spell neutralises the air surround- ing the target, making each breath stale and worthless, depriving it of oxygen. The caster must concentrate each round, in order to keep the spell operating. For the du- ration of the spell, the target will be unable to breathe, essentially drowning on dry land. When the spell begins, the target’s Resilience test determines whether it is able to gasp in one last breath before Smother cuts off the surrounding oxygen supply. If the target succeeds, it may hold its breath as normal. If it fails, it will start drowning in the next Combat Round. This spell can also be used to extinguish fires, as the flames will be starved of oxygen.   At Magnitude 1, it can extinguish a Flame, Magnitude 2 a Large Flame, Magnitude 4 a Small Fire, Magnitude 7 a Large Fire and Magnitude 10 it will put out an Inferno.   Smother has no effect on magical fire or on fire-based creatures.  ▶   Spell Resistance  This spell matches its Magnitude against the Mag- nitude of any incoming spell. If Spell Resistance’s Mag- nitude is greater than the incoming spell’s, then the in- coming spell has no effect. If the incoming spell’s Mag- nitude is equal to or greater than the Magnitude of Spell Resistance, then the spell affects the target normally. Unlike many protective spells, Spell Resistance re- mains in place for the entirety of its Duration – spells that successfully breach the spell do not dispel it. How- ever, it does not discriminate between incoming spells – a comrade attempting to magically heal the recipient of Spell Resistance must overcome it in order to success- fully use a healing spell.  ▶   Spirit Resistance  This spell matches its Magnitude against the POW of any spirit that comes into contact with the recipient. If the recipient of the spell’s combined POW + Spirit Resistance’s Magnitude is greater than the spirit’s POW, the spirit cannot touch the recipient. A spirit unable to touch a recipient will not be able to personally attack or harm them, including through ranged attacks.   A spell cast by a spirit at the recipi- ent is blocked unless its Magnitude exceeds the Spirit Resistances’s Magnitude.  ▶   Summon (Other World Creature)  Resist (Persistence) This spell allows the caster to summon one Other World creature, per casting, to the mundane world. The creature is not automatically under the caster’s control. If the summoned creature succeeds its Persistence test, it is free of the caster’s command and if so inclined may be hostile to the caster. Otherwise it acts as if under the influence of a Dominate spell, for the Duration of the spell. The Duration of the summon spell also determines how long the creature is trapped in the mundane world. Examples of of spell variations: Demons, Elementals, Spirits and Undead.  ▶   Tap (Characteristic)  Concentration, Resist (Persistence), Touch There are actually seven Tap spells, one for each Characteristic. These devastating spells allow the caster to permanently strip a target of Characteristic points, transforming them into Power Points for his own use. The caster must make contact with the target, either physically or through Touch Projection, in order to Tap it – therefore the spell cannot be used on incorporeal creatures, such as spirits. Tap will only work if its Magnitude is equal to, or greater than the target’s specified Characteristic. Thus a Magnitude 6 Tap Strength spell would only work on targets with a STR of 6 or lower. The number of points Tapped by the spell are equal to 1D6 per Combat Round the Spell is applied to the Victim. Characteristic points lost to Tap are lost permanently, though the victim can raise them again through nor- mal means of increasing a Characteristic.   Character- istics may be Tapped to 0, which usually involves the death of the victim. The exception being Charisma. For each Characteristic point the caster Taps, he will gain one Power Point. The caster is limited in the num- ber of Power Points he can gain through Tap; the spell can only increase his Power Points to double his normal limit.   An Arcane Magic user may simply Tap a target and dissipate any gained Power Points. If the caster gains more Power Points through Tap than his normal maximum, they will disappear at the rate of one Power Point per minute once the spell fin- ishes.  59 Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 62 ===

▶   Teleport  Instant, Resist (Dodge) Teleport allows an Arcane Magic user to instanta- neously move themselves, or a target, to anywhere within the range of the spell, as long as the destination can be directly observed (Sense Projection spells allow the Caster to ‘see’ locations beyond physical line of sight), there is solid footing and no object bars their arrival. If these conditions are not met, the spell automatically fails. The caster is able to teleport objects up to 3 points of SIZ per point of Magnitude.  ▶   Time Travel (Time Period)  Instant This spell transports the caster and a number of crea- tures (of SIZ 12-18) equal to the Magnitude of the spell to a named Time era via a Time Tunnel that opens up and instantly sucks them through to their destina- tion. The Duration of the spell is the time that the caster and group jumps forward or backwards through time. Casters usually have some knowledge about the time period they are travelling to, and use an Anchor, a land- mark such as a bronze statue, that exists in both the original and destination time period.   If they are trav- elling blind without such an Anchor, the casting roll is with a Penalty die (-1P) and the effects of a fumbled roll are even more catastrophic than the examples below suggest. If the spell casting fails, the caster and group still travel, but they end up in the wrong location (1D10 Km away from the Anchor point) and time (1D10 time units away, the length of the time unit depends on Duration, e.g. if the duration was in days, the time unit is days). If the spell casting is fumbled catastrophic events oc- cur. Here are some example events; the creative Game- master is encouraged to create more:  A Guardian creature from an Other World emerges from the portal and attacks the caster, in an at- tempt to close the portal.  The caster, and all within 10m of them, is sucked through the portal which then promptly closes. The caster is so befuddled that he cannot remem- ber the spell for D20+D4 hours.  As above, but the caster and party arrive in a com- pletely different Time Era or even an Alternative Reality. Arcane Magic users with this spell can change time freely without having to worry about unintentional but- terfly effect changes, or any alterations in their own ex- istence or memory from changing their past.   However, too regular use is likely to lead to the catastrophic effects of a fumble.  ▶   Treat Wounds  Instant, Touch This spell must be cast upon a wounded character. It dramatically accelerates the natural healing rate of the target.   For every point of Magnitude of this spell, the caster can repair one hit point per Combat Round, for the Duration of the spell. Treat Wounds cannot reattach or regrow a severed limb and will not work on any Major Wound effects.  8.4 Creating Magic Items  Most Arcane Magic Items found in play in a game of Fantasy Crux will have been created by the characters or Non Player Character magicians. Although the spells that their characters use to cre- ate Arcane Magic Items are detailed in their respective spell lists, its worth going through them briefly to re- mind yourself what spell does what and how it is used.  Make Scrolls   This spell allows for the creation of mag- ical writings. Scrolls can be used to transfer knowledge (spells) or directly to cast the written spell.  Make Spell Matrix   Arcane Magic users can create items and store spells using this spell. Spells stored can then be used and manipulated using the wielder’s Power Points. Arcane Magic users also find very useful the Magic spell Create Power Point Store so that they can have a greater pool for manipulations.  8.4.1   ⋆   Identify a Magic Item  There is no catch all “Detect Magical Properties” or “Know Magic item” skill in Fantasy Crux. This is quite deliberate, keeping with the general policy that such items are not the equivalent of Magical shotguns.   Some options are: Consult a Sage or other magical expert. This option will cost the characters lots of money.   Take a baseline of one hundred silvers per point of spell magnitude or some perilous quest that the character must do in re- turn. Such experts are rare, because most high ranking Magicians have little time for magical research for oth- ers, and would be more interested in their own schemes. Detect Magic spells. This merely tells you the item is magical.   A critical casting may tell the caster how powerful the item is. Trial and error.   The character tries to find out the item’s use by experiment. Allow creative and imagina- tive plans to reveal partially what the item does. Researching the myths and legends around the item. This is the most certain way of finding out what a magic item does. Of course such myths may be obscure them- selves, requiring a dangerous adventure to a long hidden repository of knowledge to find.  60   Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 63 ===

CHAPTER 9  Divine Magic  This type of magic is gained through the worship of a god or goddess. Divine Magic spells come directly from the Deity and given to the character to use on their Deity’s behalf. The first step in learning Divine Magic is to join a re- ligion that worships the Deity whose magic the character wants to learn.  9.1 Religions  Religions range in size from a handful of worshippers, meeting in secret to honour a dead hero of the revolu- tion, to the millions of devotees of a world spanning sun god. There are temples where worshippers can learn Di- vine Magic directly from their Deity. They have rules and expectations of their worshippers and anyone found wanting is expelled from the comfort and support of the religion.  9.1.1   ⋆   Religion Template  Each religion is described using the following Religion format.  Name of God or Religion Short description:   This short description briefly cov- ers the religion’s mythology and its current place in the world.  Type of Religion:   This is the type and size of religion. Great Deities are worshipped by millions and are at least acknowledged across the entire world.   Major Deities are important in a specific region and have hundreds of thousands of worshipers.   Minor Deities are usually the minor members of a religious pantheon appealing to a small group of specialist worshipers. Hero Religions worship dead heroes whose deeds and magic powers live on after their death.  Worshippers:   The type of people who typically make up the religion membership.  Worshipper Duties:   This is what the god and religion expect of its members. Break these rules and expect expulsion. On the other hand, follow these rules and promote them to others and the character will advance in the religion’s hierarchy.  Religion skills:   These are skills favoured by the reli- gion’s patron Deity and taught to its worshippers by its Priests.  Religion spells:   Divine Magic that the god teaches.  Special benefits:   Any bonuses to skill use or other spe- cial abilities or advantages that a worshipper gains by being a member of the religion. Several examples can be seen in section 9.1.5.  9.1.2   ⋆   Worshipper Duties  Each religion has a set of Worshipper Duties which rep- resent the religion’s objectives in the world. When a character does an action that fulfils one of the Worshipper Duties they gain one Improvement Point for a minor act and up to three points for a major act. When a character does an action that goes against one of the Worshipper Duties they lose between one and three Improvement Points, depending on the grievous- ness of their transgression. If they have no Improvement Points left, then they start to lose Divine Magic spells learnt from the religion as a penance, on a one to one ba- sis. The player may choose which spell to lose, but they must be ones that they have learnt from the religion. Example  Gerik the Pious acts in away that brings his god into disrepute and loses an Improvement Point.   He has no Improvement Points to lose, since he has previ- ously spent them on religion improvements, so he loses Shield 3 which he had previously learnt from the reli- gion, which now becomes Shield 2.  If the offending character has no Improvement Points or spells to lose, then they are excommunicated from the religion and may never join it again.  9.1.3   ⋆   Religion Ranks  There are four ranks of membership: Lay members, Ini- tiates, Priests and Holy Warriors.  ▶   Lay members  Lay members are normal worshippers of the religion. They regularly attend the temple on holy days and do their best to uphold the strictures of the religion. In re- turn, the religion protects them as best it can, and its Priests and Initiates cast Divine Magic on their behalf. Lay members cannot learn Divine Magic.   To become a lay member of a religion a character must have Lore (Religion) of at least 20%.  61 Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 64 ===

▶   Initiates  Initiates are worshippers who have dedicated their lives to the tenents of the religion.   They always attend the temple on holy days and always uphold the strictures of the religion.   In return, the religion will pay ran- soms if they are captured and teach the Initiate Divine Magic. Initiates can learn up to 2 Magnitude of any Di- vine Magic spell available to the religion. To become an Initiate a member of a religion needs a Lore (Religion) of at least 40% and must spend two Improvement Points.  ▶   Priests  Priests are the living embodiment of their faith, instructed by their Deity to be its living representative in the mor- tal world.   They lead the services for their temple on holy days.   In return, the religion will pay ransoms if they are captured and teach them the inner secrets of their religion (this means all available Divine Magic at unlimited Magnitude). To become a Priest a character must have a Lore (Religion) and two of the cult skills at least 75%, there must be a vacancy in the temple hier- archy, or the Priest be willing to become a missionary and establish a new temple. In addition the Player must pay five Improvement Points. Upon becoming a Priest the character gains an Allied Spirit. This is a spirit associated with the Deity who is willing to work with one of their mortal worshipers to further the aims of the religion.   The Allied Spirit is usually bound in either an animal or an item, sacred to the religion. If this item or animal is destroyed then the Allied Spirit returns to its home plane of existence.   A Priest must go on a quest of repentance, which directly benefits his religion to gain a new Allied Spirit, since the Gods look dimly on Priests who lose their Allied Spirits. An Allied Spirit starts with an INT of 2D6+6 and a POW of 3D6 and knows 3 points of Divine Magic known to the Religion.   The spirit can see immaterial and in- visible spirits, alerting its master to their presence in a twenty meter range.   An Allied Spirit is in permanent Mind Link with its master, with a range equal to its POW x5 in meters. An Allied Spirit has whatever physical characteristics that its host animal or item has.   Allied Spirits can be improved like player characters, by spending Improve- ment Points from their master’s total.  ▶   Holy Warriors  These are Holy Warriors who protect the temples and worshipers of their Deity.   Not all Religions have Holy Warriors, especially those dedicated to peace, but where they do, these warriors ceaselessly crusade to protect the faithful and punish the Religion’s enemies. Like Priests they are expected to uphold the Worshipper duties un- failingly.   Also, as the religion’s warriors, they are ex- pected to take up arms against any aggressor who at- tacks its worshippers or the religion’s Temples. These warriors are incredibly useful to the cult they belong to, which will always pay any ransom or make a rescue attempt when a Holy Warrior is captured.   In addition they teach them any Divine Magic known to the religion. The minimum requirement to become a Holy Warrior is to have Lore (Religion) of at least 50% and a Weapon Skill of 75% in the Religion’s holy weapon, usually the weapon that is most associated with the Deity that the Religion worships. In addition the Player must pay five Improvement Points. When someone becomes a Holy Warrior they are gifted a specially consecrated weapon, that gives them a bonus when fighting to defend fellow worshippers, reli- gion temples, and when attacking enemies of their faith. This bonus is usually a Bonus die (+1B) to the appro- priate weapon skill and double damage when fighting for their Religion. All damage done by such weapons is considered magical. They also gain armour, which is magically blessed by the Religion’s Deity. Normally, this is at least double the normal AP of the armour type used, and it may have additional powers depending on the Deity.  9.1.4   ⋆   Player Character Priests  Priests and Holy Warriors don’t just hang around their Temples doing their duties. They have plenty of Initiates and lay worshippers to do the more mundane adminis- trative tasks, such as collecting tithes and feeding the poor. As player characters, their lives are more interest- ing and the source of constant adventuring on behalf of their religion.   Some of the quests that they might get involved in are as follows:  Going out and converting the unbelievers (or those who believe in the wrong Deity).  Actively fighting the enemies of the religion.  Recovering long-lost symbols and powerful arte- facts of the faith.  62   Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 65 ===

Attending a cross-faith to deal with all the poli- tics and misunderstanding to come to a consensus about what to do about a common enemy.  Rushing to the aid of an embattled and besieged town of his faithful believers beset by enemies or some other form of spiritual peril.  Visiting the hinterlands to provide spiritual guid- ance and duties to those in need  Traveling to a distant Holy Mountain to commune directly with their Deity or otherwise performing idealistic inspirational acts, or to prove their worth.  Going on special mission, where success depends on Divine Magic.  Traveling as a special envoy of the Religion to show due deference to the King / Priest / High Emperor.  9.1.5   ⋆   Deity Examples  The following Religions are intended as examples or tem- plates for your own creations or as simple pick up and play religions, that can be elaborated and detailed as a campaign progresses.  ▶   The Night Mistress  When the Sun Lord sleeps, the mistress of the Night stealthily creeps up from the Underworld to play.   Whether her games are harmful or beneficial depends on the per- son’s view of the dark.  Type of Religion:   Great  Worshippers:   Monsters of the Underdark, Thieves, Out- casts from society.  Worshipper Duties:   Banish the light!   Preserve the sanctity of Dark regions, prevent the forces of light invading the underworld. Remain mysterious and un- fathomable.  Religion skills:   Deception, Ranged Combat, Unarmed Combat  Folk Magic:   Darkwall, Enhance Deception, Extinguish.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Call Shade, Fear.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) to Deception dur- ing the Night.  ▶   The Sun King  The bright blazing ruler of the day.   The everlasting source of life and light.   To some cultures he is the ul- timate lawmaker, whose word is to be obeyed without question. Also a source of healing and resurrection.  Type of Religion:   Great  Worshippers:   Emperors, Charismatic Leaders  Worshipper Duties:   Banish the dark, Guide the masses.  Religion skills:   Healing, Close Combat, Ranged Com- bat, Influence.  Folk Magic:   Enhance Influence, Fire Missile?, Fire Weapon?, Heal, Light, Multi Missile.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Call Salamander, Divine Heal, Resurrect, Sun Spear, Sun Disc, Radiant Appearance.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) to Influence skills when dealing with lower social classes.  ▶   The Sky Lord  Arrogant and aloof, the Sky Lord brings storm and rain at the behest of his elder ruling brother the Sun King. He strains at the unreasonable laws that bind him to his brother’s authority and is a constant rebel. In some lands he has cast off his brother’s chains and is acknowl- edged as the King of the Gods.  Type of Religion:   Great  Worshippers:   Barbarians  Worshipper Duties:   Ride the storm!, Fight against Tyrants, Stay free.  Religion skills:   Close Combat, Natural Lore.  Folk Magic:   Fanaticism, Extinguish, Vigour, Weapon Enhance.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Berserk, Call Sylph, Lightning Strike, Whirlwind, Enhance Machismo.  Special benefits:   Suffers no penalty when doing skill tests in rainy or windy conditions.  ▶   The Earth Mother  The all embracing and loving Earth Mother is known throughout the world.   Some people believe that she is the world itself. She is the source of all nature’s bounty, which clothes and feeds mankind, but also has a savage side that expresses itself in hurricanes, tidal waves and other natural disasters.  Type of Religion:   Great  Worshippers:   The religion is made up of people and creatures who live off the land. In civilised areas these are the peasants who farm the land and the woodsmen who hunt and gather in the forests. In the wilderness the Elves, Satyrs and Fey worship her.   She is found wherever creatures have an acknowledged connection with nature.  Worshipper Duties:   Respect the Earth. Don’t foul or pollute the environment. Practice the peaceful cut, a small prayer said in thanks to the animal spirit before killing it for food. The prayer ensures its return to the Earth Mother and through the cycle of rebirth into the world.  63 Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 66 ===

Religion skills:   Healing, Nature Lore, Resilience.  Folk Magic:   Heal, Protection  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Absorption, Berserk, Divine Heal.  Special benefits:   Any member of this cult gains a Bonus die (+1B) to their Nature Lore, due to their connec- tion to Nature, which they gain through their rela- tionship with the Earth Mother.  ▶   The Death Goddess  Banished to the Underworld by the Sun King for a heinous crime, the Sun King’s sister is a twisted force that rails against the authority of her brother.   Unable to leave the Underworld, she and her agents take that which is most precious to her brother, the very souls of his sub- jects, the living. She does this upon their physical death. Those judged unworthy by the Sun King, denied bliss in Eternal Golden Heaven, are taken by her cold embrace, into the Underworld.  Type of Religion:   Great  Worshippers:   The morbidly insane, Mercenaries, Grave- yard attendants, Assassins.  Worshipper Duties:   Respect the dead, Put down the Undead.  Religion skills:   Close Combat, Undead Lore.  Folk Magic:   Demoralise, Spirit shield, Weapon Enhance.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Call (Undead), Death March, Resurrect, Touch of Death.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) when inspecting corpse to determine time and cause of death.  ▶   The Lord of Knowledge  He is the Great Sage of Heaven, who exists only to drink in all the facts and information about the world.   His book-loving followers emulate him, making a living by running Knowledge markets and selling advice and in- formation.  Type of Religion:   Major  Worshippers:   Explorers, Librarians, Scholars, Detec- tives.  Worshipper Duties:   Find out new knowledge, cata- logue and record information, maintain public libraries, punish knowledge thieves, remain unbiased and im- partial.  Religion skills:   Lores of various types, Influence, Lan- guages.  Folk Magic:   Detect X, Mindspeech.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Find X of various types, Soul Sight, See Past.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) when using a Li- brary to find information.  ▶   The Trickster  Culture hero or culture villain?   This Deity aims to amuse him/herself by playing pranks on those who, in its opinion, deserve to be shamed before their peers. In some cultures the Trickster is revered as a Sacred Clown, who mocks authority when it is high-and-mighty and not working in the interest of the people. In others, he is out- law, defying the Divine Right of the rulers to oppress the people.  Type of Religion:   Major  Worshippers:   Thieves, Village idiots, non-conformists.  Worshipper Duties:   Play pranks on the pompous and foolish.  Religion skills:   Deception, Ranged Combat.  Folk Magic:   Befuddle, Hinder.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Illusion, Reflection, Purity, Wax Effigy, Puppet, Jigsaw.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) Deception when play- ing pranks.  ▶   The Merchant  He is a constant traveller, who gains joy by communicat- ing with the new friends that he meets along the way. Long ago he learnt the art of commerce, as a way of making his contacts happy and a way of learning about the workings of the cultures he encounters. His follow- ers know that a mule, a bag of shiny things, and a warm accepting smile, is all that is needed to open up a world of opportunity and reward.  64   Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 67 ===

Type of Religion:   Major  Worshippers:   Merchants, Heralds, Traders, Shopkeep- ers.  Worshipper Duties:   Spread the word to new places, Enrich both yourself and your temple.  Religion skills:   Influence, Perception, Ride, Drive, Lan- guages.  Folk Magic:   Clear the Path, Enhance Influence, En- hance Perception.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Treasury, Ward Camp, Create Crystal Ship.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) when using Percep- tion or Influence as part of a financial deal.  ▶   The Hearth Goddess  This down to earth Deity is a daughter of the Earth Goddess who chose to live in the urban centres of mor- tals. She looks after the home. Her name is invoked to maintain domestic harmony and fertility.  Type of Religion:   Minor  Worshippers:   House keepers and owners.  Worshipper Duties:   Keep a clean and orderly home.  Religion skills:   Craft, Influence.  Folk Magic:   Heal, Enhance Craft.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Block Fertility, En- hance Fertility, Repair and Replace.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) to any skill test in the character’s home.  ▶   The Lord of War  He is a blood-soaked Deity of violence and conflict. He is mentor and master to both the high-and-mighty General and the rank-and-file soldier.   In civilized cultures he is worshipped through ritual, where armies receive his blessing before battle.   Amongst the Barbarians he is invoked through deed, in the fire of the battle itself.  Type of Religion:   Great  Worshippers:   Generals, soldiers.  Worshipper Duties:   Fight hard, Fight to win, Fight!  Religion skills:   Close Combat, Dodge, Ranged Com- bat, Unarmed Combat.  Folk Magic:   Coordination, Fanaticism, Strength, Vigour, Weapon Enhancement.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Shield, Rout, True (Weapon), Unstoppable Charge, Ward Camp.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) for any test when leading others into Combat.  ▶   The Healer Goddess  The White One will heal anyone, regardless of behaviour and allegiance. Her white-robed worshippers are found not only in settlements but also in the wagon-trains of armies.   Healing gives even the most violent individual the chance to turn their life around and become a War- rior for Peace.  Type of Religion:   Major  Worshippers:   Healers, Doctors  Worshipper Duties:   Heal anyone regardless of out- look on life, maintain areas of sanctuary.  Religion skills:   Healing, Perception, Influence.  Folk Magic:   Heal  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Divine Heal, Res- urrect.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) to all Healing at- tempts.  ▶   The Sea Goddess  She is the avaricious sister of the Earth Goddess, who is either the elder or younger sibling depending who you talk to. She constantly wars with her sister for surface area on the planet. In some places her tides eat the land and swallow remote islands. In others her waters relent and give back dry land previously sunk in Ancient times. Any sailor is wise to ask her permission before travelling across her watery realm.  Type of Religion:   Great  Worshippers:   Sailors, fishermen, mermen, creatures of the sea.  Worshipper Duties:   Respect the sea, ensure the god- dess’ permission is sought by sailors.  Religion skills:   Sailing, Natural Lore  Folk Magic:   Detect Treasures of the Sea, Water Breath.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Call Undine, Breathe Water.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) to all sailing checks made at sea, and Athletics checks made to swim.  ▶   Chaos  The writhing thing that is Chaos, strains and buckles on the boundaries of creation.   Outside of the ordered universe, it howls to get in, and when it breaks through the cracks in reality it causes change and the warping of nature.  Type of Religion:   Great  Worshippers:   The insane, its foul monstrous spawn.  65 Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 68 ===

Worshipper Duties:   Erode the very fabric of reality, destroy beauty, inflict pain on the living.  Religion skills:   None.  Folk Magic:   Befuddle, Countermagic, Demoralise, Dis- ruption, Ignite.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Fear, Madness.  Special benefits:   Immune to any kind of Mind Control magic.  ▶   The Moon Hag  There is an old woman who lives on the moon.   She is the queen of the witches and all the spirits who live on the dark side of the moon.   She is an enigma who will send you mad if you offend her sensibilities.  Type of Religion:   Minor  Worshippers:   Magicians, Astronomers.  Worshipper Duties:   Observe the moon, maintain the mystery of the moon amongst non-religion members, study moon mysteries.  Religion skills:   Natural Lore.  Folk Magic:   Call Magic Spell spirit, Counter magic.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Reflection, Mind- blast, Mindlink, Madness.  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) to any skill roll when dealing with Moon spirits.  ▶   The Huntress  The Divine Huntress stalks the land.   In primitive and barbaric societies she is the patron of those who go into the wilderness to bring back essential meats to the tribe. In more civilised areas, she takes on the character of the supreme risk-taker, looking for more and more fabulous and exotic prey for glory and renown.  Type of Religion:   Minor  Worshippers:   Hunters, Big Game Hunters.  Worshipper Duties:   Be true to the hunt, do not de- plete the hunting grounds, capture poachers.  Religion skills:   Deception, Ranged Combat, Nature Lore.  Folk Magic:   Multi Missile, Coordination, Clear Path, Speedart.  Divine Magic:   All common spells, Sureshot, True (Bow or Spear).  Special benefits:   Bonus die (+1B) Deception when stalk- ing prey.  9.1.6   ⋆   Learning Divine Magic  Divine Magic can be taught only to members of a reli- gion with an appropriate Lore (Religion) skill and be of Initiate, Priest or Holy Warrior status (each rank requir- ing Improvement Points).  9.1.7   ⋆   Learning Spells  A character with access to the Divine Magic discipline can learn new spells by paying a cost in Improvement Points, equal to twice the Magnitude of the spell, to the Deity. This may be done in an incremental fashion, i.e. the player buys Shield 1 for two Improvement Points and then later increases this to Shield 3, by spending an additional four points.   These points are not regained, even when the character leaves the religion.  9.1.8   ⋆   Casting Spells  A character must be able to gesture with his hands and be able to chant in order to cast a spell.   Whenever a spell is cast using Divine Magic, there will always be a sight and sound that nearby creatures can detect, be it a flash of light, a crack of thunder or a shimmering in the air.   The exact effects, are up to the Gamemaster and Player to decide but will automatically be detected by any creatures within ten times the Magnitude of the spell, in metres. Casting Divine Magic is automatically successful. No dice need be rolled, no chances of a fumble or critical either.  ▶   Power Points  Divine Magic does not cost any Power Points when it is cast.  ▶   Casting Time  Divine Magic spells always take only a single combat Action to cast and takes place on the Combat Order of the character casting the spell. Distractions or attacks on the spellcaster as he casts will either automatically ruin the spell (if the spellcaster is blinded or disarmed, or suffers a Major Wound) or require Persistence tests for them to maintain concen- tration on the spell.  ▶   Regaining Cast Divine Magic  Each Divine Magic spell may be cast only once, after which the character must return to a temple and pray or take part in a worshiping ceremony on the religion’s holy day to regain use of the spell.   Thus, normally, Divine Magic is regained during the downtime between adventures. In-game characters may regain Divine Magic by one of two ways.  Each time the character successfully performs a worshipper duty, the character regains the choice of one of their spent spells.  66   Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 69 ===

They may also call on their deity and spend a Hero Point to regain a spent spell of their choosing.  ▶   Limitations  Divine Magic spells do not stack, i.e. Shield 1 plus Shield 2 does not give the protection of a Shield 3 spell.  ▶   Dismissing Spells  A caster can dismiss any Permanent or Duration Divine Magic spell(s) he has cast as a single combat action. Ceasing to cast a Concentration spell is immediate and not a Combat Action.  ▶   Splitting Magnitude  Divine Magic allows the caster to ‘split’ a spell’s Mag- nitude into multiple spells.   For instance, if the caster knows the Absorption spell at Magnitude 3, he may choose to cast it as a single Magnitude 3 spell, or he may split it into three Magnitude 1 Absorption spells, or one Magnitude 1 and one Magnitude 2 Absorption spell. The split spells are treated as separate instances and are cast separately.  ▶   The Power of Divine Magic  When in a direct contest with other forms of magic, Di- vine Magic is considered to have double its normal Mag- nitude.  ▶   Common Divine Magic  The following spells are listed as ‘All’, since all Cults teach them: Consecrate, Create Blessed Item, Create Idol, Dis- miss Magic, Divination, Excommunicate, Exorcism, Ex- tension, Find X, Mindlink, Soul Sight, Spirit Block, Spir- itual Journey.  9.1.9   ⋆   Divine Intervention  Characters also gain the ability to call for Divine Inter- vention.   A character who is an Initiate, or higher, can call upon his Deity for Divine Intervention whenever he faces a desperate situation. He may even do so if dead or unconscious, as long as it is called for in the instant that consciousness fades or death occurs. When Divine Intervention is requested, roll 1D100. If this roll is equal to or less than the character’s POW, the call for aid is answered. However, the gods demand a heavy price for their help and the character will suffer a permanent loss of POW equal to the 1D100 roll, if they are successful. If the character’s POW is reduced to 0 by this, their soul is taken to serve the god directly, effectively killing the character permanently (though their request will still be granted). A character can only call for Divine Intervention once per month, whether he is successful or not. Divine Intervention can take many forms and the fol- lowing can be considered guidelines:  Allow the character to cast any religion spell (of that Deity) at any Magnitude.  Allow a religion spell to affect every worshipper of the god within the character’s line of sight.  Bring back to life a worshipper (who may not be the character calling for Divine Intervention). Various ‘divine’ effects are also possible depending on the nature of the character’s Deity. Examples could include creating a fog to allow the character to escape from enemies, doubling their STR to defeat a powerful enemy or causing a river to break its banks to stall an invading army. Divine Intervention cannot be used to directly harm or slay mortal creatures.   Gods will refuse to aid non- worshippers and their effects will be related to their sphere of influence.  9.1.10   ⋆   Spell Traits  The traits used by Divine Magic spells are detailed be- low.  Area (X):   The spell affects all targets within a radius specified in metres.  Concentration:   The spell’s effects will remain in place so long as the character concentrates on it.   Concen- trating on a spell is functionally identical to casting the spell, requiring the caster to continue to gesture with both arms, chant, and ignore distractions.  Duration (X):   The spell’s effects will stay in place for the number of minutes indicated.   Unless otherwise specified this will be 15 minutes.  Instant:   The spell’s effects take place instantly.   The spell itself then disappears.  67 Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 70 ===

Magnitude (X):   The strength and power of the spell.  Permanent:   The spell’s effects remain in place until they are dispelled or dismissed.  Progressive:   This indicates that the spell can be learnt and cast at greater levels of Magnitude than the min- imum.  Ranged:   Ranged spells may be cast upon targets up to a maximum distance of the character’s POW x 5 in metres.  Resist (Dodge/Persistence/Resilience):   The spell’s effects do not take effect automatically.   The target may make a Dodge, Persistence or Resilience test (as specified by the spell) in order to avoid the effect of the spell entirely. Note that Resist (Dodge) spells re- quire the target to be able to use Reactions in order to Dodge. In the case of Area spells, the Resist (Dodge) trait requires the target to dive in order to mitigate the spell’s effect.  Touch:   Touch spells require the character to actually touch his target for the spell to take effect.  Religion:   The type of religion that offers this spell to it’s worshippers.   If the religion is listed as All, the spell is a Common spell available in all religions. The religion’s description will help determine which spells should or should not be available.  9.2 Spells  ▶   Absorption  Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Touch [Religions: Earth, Night] This spell absorbs incoming spells aimed at the tar- get or his equipment, converting their magical energy into Power Points which are then available to the target. Once cast on a subject, Absorption will attempt to ab- sorb the effects of any spells cast at the target.   It will not have any effect on spells that are already affecting a character.   The effects of Absorption depend on the relative Magnitude of both itself and the incoming spell. If the Absorption’s Magnitude is equal or greater to the incoming spell then it is absorbed and Absorption re- mains; if not Absorption is eliminated and the incoming spell takes effect.   Any spell absorbed by this spell is cancelled and has no effect. A character may not accumulate more Power Points than his POW while Absorption is in effect – excess Power Points garnered through Absorption simply van- ish. Absorption is incompatible with Reflection, Shield and Spirit Block.  ▶   Berserk  Duration 15, Magnitude 2, Touch [Religions: Beasts, War] The recipient of this spell is overcome with bloodlust, causing them to disregard their own safety and loyalties but imbuing them with tremendous stamina and combat ability. The recipient will automatically succeed any Resilience test for the duration of the spell. The recipient also au- tomatically succeeds at any Fatigue tests and cannot be rendered unconscious.   The Close Combat skills of the recipient receive two Bonus dice (+2B) for the spell’s duration. However, the subject may not Parry, Dodge or cast any magic spells while under the influence of Berserk. Normally, the recipient remains in the Berserk state for the entire 15 minute duration of the spell, but Gamemas- ters may allow a Berserk character to shake off the effects with a Persistence test with two Penalty dice (-2P). At the end of the spell, the recipient immediately becomes Fatigued. Berserk may not be combined with Fanaticism and in such cases Berserk will always take precedence.  ▶   Block Fertility  Magnitude 3, Permanent [Religions: Earth] While this spell is in place, the recipient is unable to conceive.   This can be seen as a blessing or a curse depending on the view of the recipient. The spell can be dispelled by the caster whenever they want. Otherwise the effect of the spell is permanent.  ▶   Breath Water  Duration 15, Magnitude 2, Touch [Religions: Sea, Water] This spell allows an air-breathing creature to breathe water for the spell’s duration (the subject will still be able to breathe air as well). It may also be used upon a water-breathing creature to allow it to breathe air.  ▶   Call (Elemental)  Magnitude 1, Permanent, Progressive [Religions: Any with affinity to elements] This spell summons and binds to the service of the caster an elemental from another plane of existence, of a size dependant on the Magnitude of the spell: 1=Small, 2=Medium, 3=Large, 4=Huge (for more details on El- ementals see page 94).   The elemental stays under the control of the Priest until it is killed or the Call spell is dispelled. To be successfully cast the spell requires an equal volume of the same material that the elemental is made up of. For example, a Large Undine (Water elemental) requires a pool of water of at least 50 m3 before it can be summoned.  68   Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 71 ===

▶   Call (Undead)  Magnitude 1, Permanent, Progressive [Religions: Evil, Death] This spell reanimates a dead human corpse and turns it into an undead creature, of a type determined by the Magnitude of the spell: 1=Skeleton, 2=Zombie, 5=Ghoul, 8=Vampire. The undead creature stays under the con- trol of the Priest until it is killed or the Call spell is dispelled.  ▶   Consecrate  Area Special, Magnitude 1, Permanent, Progressive [Religions: All] This spell is as much a part of a temple’s foundation as is its cornerstone, but may actually be cast almost anywhere. It creates a sphere with a radius of ten me- tres per point of Magnitude.   The consecrated sphere is sacred to the caster’s god.   Consecrate by itself does nothing to keep outsiders at bay, but the caster of the spell will know immediately if a spell, spirit or someone who is not a lay member of his cult crosses the bound- aries of the Consecrate spell.  ▶   Create Blessed Items  Area Special, Magnitude 1, Permanent, Progressive [Religions: All] This spell allows the caster to create items which store Divine Magic spell(s) that are blessed by a Priest with power from the Deity. Only Priests and High Priests can create blessed items. The enchanter forgets the spell(s) he blesses the item with (i.e.   he has to relearn it with Improvement Points). The wielder of the item can cast the spell(s) the item is blessed with, but once the item’s power is discharged then it must be reconsecrated at a temple of the reli- gion. The consecration takes as many hours as the Mag- nitude of the spell. If the Magnitude of the spell is higher than two, the consecrating team must have at least one Priest. The wielder must be a member of either the re- ligion that created the blessed item or an allied religion. Blessed items become protected by the religion’s De- ity and can not be broken by normal non-magical means.  ▶   Create Idol  Magnitude 4 [Religions: All] This spell requires an image of the caster’s god worth 100 GPs to be made, while a Priest reads from the sacred texts of the Deity telling the tales and myths. This stores the god’s spells, and can be used by Priests and Initiates to regain spells and can be used by Lay Members to receive lessons, via visions, upon touching the idol. Such visions will increase the Religion skill of a Lay Member by 1D10% when they are repeatedly exposed to them.  ▶   Create Crystal Ship  Magnitude 4, Duration the length of the voyage [Religions: Merchant] From out of the air coalesces a Crystal Ship, a magi- cal vessel that sails through the air to a single destination preordained by the caster.   The caster need never have been there, but the casters’ Deity must know of it. The ship is about the size of a merchant cog (one-masted as described in table 11.2, page 84) and is fitted with no weapons. Although the ship heads steadily towards the destination, at a rate of 100 km a day, the fine maneu- vering of the ship is managed by the mental thoughts of the caster.  ▶   Death March  Magnitude 4, Duration 1 Day [Religions: Death] This spell raises the local spirits of a settlement and makes them parade up and down the main road of that settlement, for a twenty four hour period.   Most of the dead will be in the form of ghosts, but the freshly dead will rise as Zombies, and those who still have bones in the cemetery will rise as Skeletons. Both types of physical dead will attack any living beings that get in their way.  ▶   Dismiss Magic  Instant, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Ranged [Religions: All] Dismiss Magic may be cast against either a general target or a specific spell.   Dismiss Magic will eliminate a combined Magnitude of spells equal to its own Magni- tude, starting with the most powerful affecting the tar- get. If it fails to eliminate any spell (because the spell’s  69 Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 72 ===

Magnitude is too high), then its effects immediately end and no more spells will be eliminated.   A spell cannot be partially eliminated, so a target under the effects of a spell whose Magnitude is higher than that of Dis- miss Magic will not have any spells currently affecting it eliminated.   Remember that Divine Magic’s Magnitude counts as double vs non-divine magic. The caster can also target Dismiss Magic against a single specific spell.   Dismiss Magic may be fired as a Reaction, but only when another spell is cast within Dis- miss Magic’s Range that the character wishes to counter. A successful Dismiss Magic disrupts the other spell and nullifies it.  ▶   Divination  Instant, Magnitude 1, Progressive [Religions: All] For each point of Magnitude of this spell the caster can ask one question of their Deity, which they must answer to the best of their ability.   A Deity can only answer questions it knows about and that falls within its sphere of power. For example, a Mountain God will know exactly what is going on its slopes at any given time, but will be completely ignorant about the Ocean. Gods will also commonly ask for a sacrifice of an an- imal or precious object worth one Gold Piece per ques- tion asked.   Particularly cruel and bloodthirsty deities will demand blood sacrifices of sentient beings.  ▶   Divine Heal  Instant, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Touch [Religions: Earth, Fertility] This powerful spell instantly heals a number of Hit Points equal to its Magnitude times four. It also cures any natural deseases and poisons. Each casting of Divine Heal will heal one Major Wound and if necessary will reattach or regenerate damaged limbs and organs.  ▶   Enhance Fertility  Magnitude 3, Permanent [Religions: Earth, Fertility] This spell makes any one creature more fertile than normal.   If it is an animal that has multiple offspring then it doubles the number.   For creatures who have singular births, it guarantees conception and birth of the offspring. This spell negates the effects of any Block Fertility spell.  ▶   Enhance Unit  Magnitude 3, Duration 6 Hours [Religions: War] For the duration of this spell a troop of up to thirty soldiers gain +1D6 damage. Also they cannot be routed or affected by any mind control magic (such as Befud- dle).  ▶   Excommunicate  Magnitude 5, Permanent, Resist (Persistence) [Religions: All] This spell severs the mystical link an Initiate enjoys with their god, causing the target of the spell to im- mediately and permanently lose all Divine Magic from the caster’s religion. The target will never again be able to learn or use Divine Magic spells from the religion, though they will still be able to use Lore (Religion) for purely academic purposes. This spell must be cast by a Priest and takes one hour to cast. The Initiate need not be present. The spell can only be cast on Initiates or higher and who worship the same god of the caster of the spell.  ▶   Exorcism  Concentration, Magnitude 3 [Religions: All] A Divine Magic caster can draw out a spirit currently possessing a mortal being by using this spell. Whether the possession is dominant or covert is immaterial. This spell forces a possessing spirit into Spirit Com- bat. The caster uses his Religion (Own) as the attacking skill in the opposed contest, as this represents the stre- ngth of their faith. If the caster is successful in defeating the spirit, it is cast out of the victim and flees.   If the caster fails, the spirit remains in the possessed victim.  ▶   Extension  Duration Special, Magnitude 1, Progressive [Religions: All] This spell lengthens the duration of any Divine Magic spell with the Duration trait. Extension, and the spell it is extending, are cast simultaneously by the caster – this is an exception to the normal rule that only one Divine Magic spell may be cast during a single Combat Round. Each point of Magnitude of the Extension spell dou- bles the target spell’s duration.   Thus, a Magnitude 1 Extension increases Breathe Water’s Duration to 30 min- utes, a Magnitude 2 increases it to one hour, Magnitude 3 increases it to two hours, Magnitude 4 increases it to four hours, and so on.  ▶   Fear  Instant, Magnitude 1, Ranged, Resist (Persistence) [Religions: Chaos, Night] This spell causes the target to be gripped with over- whelming fear. Fear has no effect on unconscious targets, targets without an INT Characteristic or targets that are  70   Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 73 ===

currently under the influence of a Fear spell. The effect depends on the result of the Persistence check as follows:  Fumble:   Victim instantly loses half original Hit Point damage (enough to cause a Major Wound) as its heart falters.  Failure:   Victim flees in screaming terror for a number of Combat Rounds equal to 20 minus its POW (mini- mum of one Combat Round). Victim will not engage in combat unless forced to and will use the Run Com- bat Action whenever possible (unless a faster mode of egress is available).  Success:   Victim is shaken and disturbed, suffering a Penalty die (-1P) to all skill tests for a number of Combat Rounds equal to 20 minus its POW (mini- mum of one Combat Round).  Critical:   Victim is unaffected by the spell and cannot be affected by further Fear spells for a number of Com- bat Rounds equal to its POW.  ▶   Find X  Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Ranged [Religions: All] This is actually several spells, though they all operate in a similar fashion, which allow the caster to locate the closest target of the spell within its range.   This effect is stopped by a thick substance such as metal, earth or stone if it is at least one metre thick. It is also blocked by Absorption, though the caster will know the target is somewhere within range (though not its precise location) and that it is being protected by Absorption. Unlike the Folk Magic Detect spells, the Find spells do not require concentration on the part of the caster – they simply function and alert them to the presence of whatever they are meant to locate. The separate Find spells are listed below.  Find Enemy:   Gives the location of one creature who intends to harm the caster.  Find Magic:   Gives the location of the nearest magic item, magical creature, or active spell.  Find (Species):   Each Find Species spell will give the location of the nearest creature of the specified species. Examples of this spell include Find Goblin, Find Dwarf and Find Horse  Find Substance:   Each Find Substance spell will give the location of the nearest substance of the specified type. Examples of this spell include Find Coal, Find Gold and Find Wood. The Gamemaster should provide the rough power of the detected subject (‘weak magic’ or ‘rich gold lode’).  ▶   Illusion  Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Ranged [Religions: Moon, Trickster] This spell creates an illusion based on all five senses. The illusion will seem real and solid unless the person looking at it succeeds in a Perception test. If the viewer succeeds in a Perception test and the Illusion could usu- ally cause damage if believed in, it can no longer cause damage to that character.   As soon as a viewer disbe- lieves the illusion it becomes insubstantial and ghost-like to him. The Size and the strength of the illusion is governed by the Magnitude. A Magnitude 1 Illusion creates ob- jects or creatures up to SIZ 20 and viewers have two Bonus dice (+2B) to their Perception test to disbelieve the illusion.   For every extra Magnitude the caster can choose to either increase the size by 10 or apply a Penalty die (-1P) to the Perception test.   Thus, with 5 Magni- tude a caster could create a creature up to SIZ 30 with a Penalty die (-1P) to notice it. A positive Perception modifier means that the illu- sion is slightly fuzzy and unreal round the edges while a negative modifier means that it is indistinguishable from the real thing.  ▶   Invisibility  Magnitude 4, Concentration, Touch, Personal [Religion: Trickster] For the duration of the spell the recipient is com- pletely invisible to sight.   They can still be heard, felt or smelled, with a Penalty die (-1P) to Perception tests. Also, the spell is automatically dispelled if the caster loses concentration, or the recipient casts a spell or makes an attack.   The recipient also becomes visible immedi- ately after the spell ending, so even if the caster im- mediately casts another Invisibility spell there will be a delay between castings where the recipient is visible.  ▶   Jigsaw  Magnitude 4, Duration 6 Hours, Resist (Persistence) [Religions: Trickster] This spell literally causes the target to fall to pieces upon a failed Persistence roll.   The victim will still be alive, but will not require food or water during the time the spell is in operation.   If the spell is dispelled the victim will die unless they have been painstakingly put together beforehand.  ▶   Lightning Strike  Instant, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Ranged, Resist (Dodge) [Religions: Storm] This spell causes a sizzling bolt of lightning to streak from the hand of the caster toward the target.   If the bolt is not dodged, each point of Magnitude of the spell will cause 1D6 damage. Armour Points are not effective  71 Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 74 ===

against this damage and it counts as both magical and electrical damage.  ▶   Madness  Instant, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Ranged, Resist (Persistence) [Religions: Chaos, Moon] This spell causes the target to lose contact with real- ity and become a gibbering loon. Madness has no effect on unconscious targets, targets without an INT Charac- teristic or targets that are currently under the effect of a Madness spell. The effect depends on the result of the Persistence check as follows:  Fumble:   Victim instantly loses 1D4 INT permanently and lapses into a catatonic state for a number of min- utes equal to 20 minus its POW (minimum of one Combat Round).  Failure:   Victim gibbers and raves uncontrollably for a number of Combat Rounds equal to 20 minus its POW (minimum of one Combat Round).   Victim will per- form random Combat Actions during this period. Roll 1D6: (1) Move to close combat and attack a random target; (2) Run in a random direction; (3) Cast a spell at random target; (4) Use ranged attack against ran- dom target; (5) Shout at random target; (6) Change stance.  Success:   Victim is shaken and disturbed, suffering a Penalty die (-1P) to all skill tests for a number of Combat Rounds equal to 20 minus its POW (mini- mum of one Combat Round).  Critical:   Victim is unaffected by the spell and cannot be affected by further Madness spells for a number of Combat Rounds equal to its POW.  ▶   Mindblast  Instant, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Ranged, Resist (Persistence) [Religions: Moon] This spell applies a penalty to the victim’s INT equal to the Magnitude of the spell. The effect lasts a number of days equal to the caster’s current CHA.  ▶   Mindlink  Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Ranged [Religions: All] This spell allows the transmission of spell knowledge, conscious thoughts and Power Points between partici- pants. Additional points of Magnitude allow multiple sets of people to be linked together, either creating several sep- arate pairs of Mindlinked people, or making the caster the central hub of a small Mindlink network. In the sec- ond case, only the central character is linked directly to other participants. Mindlink must be cast upon all participants at the same time and is limited to consenting participants. Any participant in a Mindlink may use the spell knowledge and Power Points of others they are linked to without consent. Participants in a Mindlink have a special vulnera- bility to INT, POW, CHA and morale-affecting spells. Such a spell cast against any member of a Mindlink will affect all those connected, though all participants are entitled to defend themselves individually. Although participants in a Mindlink share PPs and conscious thought, they remain their own entity. Mind- link does not include hidden thoughts, memories, uncon- scious urges or permanent spell knowledge. A Mindlink participant may cast a spell one of the other participants has, but only if they have the necessary spellcasting skill – Mindlink does not allow sharing of skills. Any participant may sever their connection to the Mindlink as a Combat Action.   If any participant in Mindlink leaves the spell’s range, that participant is con- sidered to have left the Mindlink.  ▶   Miraculous Item  Magnitude 1, Progressive, Duration 1 Hour [Religions: Craft] This spell allows the caster to create items literally from nowhere.   The size of the item depends upon the Magnitude of the spell:  1 - Small items, such as pots, plates, knives, a de- faced detail on a stone fresco, etc.  2 - Medium.   Large containers such as wine am- phorae, target shields, longswords, human sized armour, a missing arm on a broken statue.  3 - Large. Tower shields, broken doors, a missing masonry feature such as a column.  72   Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 75 ===

4 - Huge. Giant armour, ruined houses, shattered towers.  5 - Enormous. The broken parts of a walking cas- tle, the ruined walls of a city. Such items are always of the finest quality and do not break under any circumstance. For the cost of the Mag- nitude in Improvement Points the item can last perma- nently. Otherwise it disappears after one hour.  ▶   Mischief  Magnitude 2, Touch, Resist (Persistence), Duration 15 [Religions: Trickster] Mischief is a minor trickster’s spell which afflicts its target with a small irritating curse. Roll 1D20 on the following list for a result, which stays in place for the duration of the spell.  1:   Clothes disappear.  2:   Hair goes green.  3:   Hair drops out.  4:   Grows beard regardless of sex.  5:   The target’s weapon becomes a bunch of flowers.  6:   Armour becomes the festive dress of the opposite sex.  7:   Feet become duck feet.  8:   Head becomes that of a domestic animal (cow, pig, sheep, etc.)  9:   Victim smells of excrement (Penalty die (-1P) to De- ception or Influence rolls).  10:   Wobbles uncontrollably (Penalty die (-1P) to at- tacks, Athletics and any other roll involving dexter- ity).  11:   The victim can only speak gibberish.  12:   The victim says the most inappropriate things at the most socially awkward times.   Penalty die (-1P) to any Influence rolls.  13:   The victim falls asleep for 1D6 rounds on failed Per- sistence roll whenever they enter combat.  14:   Makes loud flatulent noises whenever they move; Penalty die (-1P) to any Deception rolls.  15:   The victim is compelled to tell the truth at all times.  16:   No one ever takes the character seriously.   Always has to make an Influence roll with a Penalty die (-1P) to convince others.  17:   Turns into a dog.  18:   Arms turn to rubber, unable to hold anything.  19:   The victim becomes short, half SIZ.  20:   Roll twice.  ▶   Puppet  Magnitude 3, Resist (Persistence), Concentration, Duration 6 Hours [Religions: Trickster] The caster uses this spell to enchant a puppet which is the focus of the spell and the stand-in for the victim. The victim can use Persistence to resist the spell, and if they fail their actions are controlled via the puppet by the Caster, for the duration of the spell. The victim is aware of not being in control of their body, but is powerless to stop it. The exception to this rule is when the victim’s life, or that of a friend is in danger because of the Puppeteer’s commands. Then the victim is allowed another Persistence roll, and, if successful, breaks free of the spell’s control.  ▶   Purity (Religion/Creed)  Magnitude 2, Touch [Religions: Trickster] This spell removes a perceived sin according to a par- ticular religion. If the caster is out of favour because of said sin, all is forgotten and forgiven.  ▶   Quicksand  Magnitude 2, Area, Resist (Persistence), Duration 15 [Religions: Earth] This spell creates a patch of quicksand 10m square. The earth in the area becomes boggy and saturated with water. On a failed Persistence roll, any character stand- ing on the patch will sink down into the earth, at a rate of 1 metre a round. The quicksand holds the victim firmly and only by dispelling the magic can they be rescued. Once the duration of the spell is over the victim, if not on the surface, is buried under the now solid earth (see Suffocation rules on page 80).  ▶   Radiant Appearance  Magnitude 2, Duration 1 Day [Religions: Sun] The recipient of this spell glows with light and power. They gain two Bonus dice (+2B) to any Influence rolls for the duration of the spell. Also any light-hating crea- tures suffer a Penalty die (-1P) when attacking the re- cipient.  ▶   Repair and Replace  Magnitude 1, Progressive, Instant [Religions: Craft] This spell repairs broken crafted items.   It also re- places missing parts of an item.   The size of the item depends on the Magnitude of the spell:  1 - Small items, such as pots, plates, knives, a de- faced detail on a stone fresco, etc.  73 Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 76 ===

2 - Medium.   Large containers such as wine am- phorae, target shields, longswords, human sized armour, a missing arm on a broken statue.  3 - Large. Tower shields, broken doors, a missing masonry feature such as a column.  4 - Huge. Giant armour, ruined houses, shattered towers.  5 - Enormous. The broken parts of a walking cas- tle, the ruined walls of a city.  ▶   Reflection  Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Ranged [Religions: Trickster] This spell reflects incoming spells aimed at the tar- get or his equipment, redirecting the spell back at the original caster.   Once cast on a subject, Reflection will attempt to reflect any spells cast at the target.   It will not have any effect on spells that are already affecting a character. The effects of Reflection depend on the rela- tive Magnitude of both itself and the incoming spell. If the Reflection’s Magnitude is equal or greater to the in- coming spell then it is reflected and Reflection remains; if not Reflection is eliminated and the incoming spell takes effect. Reflection is incompatible with Absorption, Shield and Spirit Block.  ▶   Resurrect  Concentration Special, Instant, Magnitude 5, Touch [Religions: Death, Fertility, Sun] The body of the deceased must be present and must be whole. If the target died due to disease or poison, the ailment must be eliminated or the Resurrect spell will fail. This spell summons the deceased spirit to return its former body. Resurrect takes a number of minutes equal to the target’s totalled Characteristics to take effect, during which time the caster must maintain concentra- tion on the spell.   If interrupted the spell fails.   If the spell is completed without interruption the dead charac- ter returns to life with one hit point. Resurrect must be cast within a number of days equal to the POW of the deceased. Casting the spell after this point results in the magic automatically failing.  ▶   Rout  Magnitude 3 [Religions: War] When aimed at a body of warriors, no more than one hundred persons, they make a Persistence roll or imme- diately lose all cohesion as a unit and rout.   Routing units move at double movement, away from the caster to ideally a place of safety. They will not defend them- selves, but will attack any enemy units that get in their way, with the aim of getting through them to their place of safety.  ▶   See Past  Magnitude 2, Area, Concentration [Religions: Knowledge] When cast on a 10m area, the caster can see that area as it was in any past point of time he wishes. They still need to make successful Perception rolls to notice details, such as important clues, and they cannot interact with the scene they see in any way, shape or form.  ▶   Shield  Duration 15, Magnitude 2, Progressive [Religions: War] This spell protects the caster from physical and mag- ical attacks.   Each two points of Magnitude gives the caster two Armour Points as well as a Bonus die (+1B) to any tests the caster may make to resist malign magical effects.   These effects are cumulative with other spells, as well as any physical armour the caster is wearing. Shield is incompatible with Absorption, Reflection and Spirit Block.  ▶   Soul Sight  Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Touch [Religions: All] This spell allows the recipient to see the POW aura of anyone he looks at, enabling them to discern that creature’s current Power Points, as well as the nature of any active spells or enchanted items the creature is carrying. It also allows the recipient to see into the Spirit World.  ▶   Stink Bomb  Magnitude 1, Resist (Resilience) [Religions: All] Upon being targeted by this spell, the victim be- comes covered in a tightly fitting cloak of noxious smelling gas for 1D6 rounds. Each round the victim must make a Resilience test or take 1D4 damage. If the resistance test result is fumbled, the character is unconscious for the remaining duration of the spell from being knocked out by the smell.   All Influence tests and other social interactions are at a Penalty die (-1P) for the duration of the spell.  ▶   Spirit Block  Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Touch [Religions: All]  74   Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 77 ===

The recipient of Spirit Block may only be touched by Spirits with a POW high enough to break through the spell’s Magnitude; 1 - POW 10+, 2 - POW 17+, 3 - POW 26+, 4 - POW 37+, 5 - POW 50+, 6 - POW 65+, 7 - 82+, 8 - 101+. A spirit unable to touch a Spirit Blocked character will not be able to personally attack or harm the recipi- ent, including through ranged attacks (such as a thrown spectral javelin). A spell cast by a spirit at the recipient is blocked unless its Magnitude exceeds Spirit Block’s Magnitude. Spirit Block is incompatible with Absorption, Reflec- tion and Shield.  ▶   Sun Disc  Magnitude 1, Ranged, Resist (Dodge) [Religions: All] Upon casting this spell, the Caster projects a disc of blinding light from their hand.   Targets in the path of the disc are blinded for 1D4 hours, unless they pass their Dodge skill test. Its warming effect melts ice upon contact, even magical ice, if under three magnitude in power, and gives anyone it touches two Bonus dice (+2B) to resistance versus cold.  ▶   Sunspear  Instant, Magnitude 4, Ranged, Resist (Dodge) [Religions: Sun] This spell will only function in direct sunlight. When cast, a shaft of light two metres wide streaks from the sky to blast a single target, who must be visible to the caster. If the target does not dive out of the way, the blazing light will burn it for 4D6 damage.   Armour points are not effective against this damage and it counts as both magical and fire damage.  ▶   Summon Holy Steed  Magnitude 3, Duration 1 Day [Religions: Various] This spell summons a Holy Steed (see page 100) from the Other World which is associated with the Deity that the Summoner worships. The Steed will obey the orders of the Summoner until the duration of the spell is up at which point the Steed will return to the Other World from whence it came. If the caster spends 3 Improvement Points the Steed summoned will remain in their service on a permanent basis, unless killed.  ▶   Summon Holy Warrior  Magnitude 3, Duration 1 Day [Religions: Various] This spell summons a Holy Warrior (see page 101) from the Other World which is associated with the De- ity that the Summoner worships. The Warrior will obey  the orders of the Summoner until the duration of the spell is up at which point the Warrior will return to the Other World from whence it came. If the caster spends 3 Improvement Points the Warrior summoned will remain in their service on a permanent basis, unless killed. War- riors are usually summoned to act as bodyguards, trea- sure guards and assassins. Special powers for Warriors are available at the cost of increasing the spell’s Magnitude by 1. Typically these are random (roll 1D12):  1 - Additional mode of attack.  2 - Extra set of arms, additional attack.  3 - Extra natural weapon, eg. Horns D10 damage.  4 - Breathes fire or ice or lighting (appropriate to elemental alliances of Deity) for D10 damage once per combat round.  5 - Wings, therefore flies at 18 Move.  6 - Hideous appearance that strikes fear into en- emies (two Bonus dice (+2B) to Influence roll when Intimidating) or Beautiful appearance which charms all that behold them (two Bonus dice (+2B) to In- fluence rolls).  7 - Mighty Divine weapons that does D20 damage.  8 - Shapechanger.  9 - Heavily armoured (9 AP instead of normal 6AP).  10 - Can become insubstantial and walk through solid walls.   While in this state can not interact with the real world.  11 - Can become Invisible at will.  75 Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 78 ===

12 - Faster, +18 Move, than normal. Examples: The Horned Horror of Yiko has Ranged Combat with a bow as an additional mode of attack, horns on its head which can be used as a weapon, and has a pair of wings, which means it requires a 6 Magnitude spell to summon it. The Treasure Demon of Surlis-Sang, is a shapechanger that actually hides as the Treasure chest containing the treasure it is protecting, and so needs a 4 point spell to summon.  ▶   Sureshot  Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Ranged [Religions: Hunter] When cast on a missile weapon (such as a knife, ar- row, javelin or rock), firing it triggers the spell. Unless the wielder of the weapon rolls an automatic failure or a fumble, the missile hits successfully (though it may be dodged or parried). So long as the target is within the maximum range of the weapon, the missile will strike home, regardless of concealment or any other factors. Attempts to parry or dodge the missile suffer a Penalty die (-1P). Combining Sureshot with Fire Missile, Multi Missile or Speedart does not work, since Sureshot will always take precedence in such cases.  ▶   Touch of Death  Magnitude 4, Touch, Instant, Resist (Persistence) [Religions: Death] The caster must touch their victim and on a failed Persistence test the victim falls dead.   This incredibly powerful spell is available to only members of religions whose Deity wield the power of Death itself. It is usually used to readdress the balance where a person who by all rights should be dead is still alive.  ▶   Treasury  Magnitude 4, Duration 1 Day [Religions: Merchant] This spell creates a secure room, for one day, to store valuables.   All the entrances are locked and only the caster can come in and out without setting off a magical alarm that they can hear, no matter how far away from the room they are.  ▶   True (Weapon)  Magnitude 3, Duration 15, Ranged [Religions: War] When cast on the specified type of weapon, this spell doubles that weapon’s normal damage dice. Other mod- ifiers, such as Damage Modifier, are not affected.   The wielder of the weapon should roll the weapon’s damage twice and total the result.  ▶   Ward Camp  Magnitude 2, Duration 8 Hours, Area [Religions: Merchant] This spell protects a camp with an area of 50 meters squared. Anyone crossing the invisible boundary of the spell takes 1D10 damage and sets off a magical alarm that immediately awakens everyone within the camp. The Ward stays in place, even after it has been crossed, for the full duration of the spell.  ▶   War Effigy  Magnitude 4, Resist (Persistence) [Religions: Trickster] This spell enchants a small wax representation of the intended victim. Spells can be cast at the effigy and af- fect the victim, despite the distance between the effigy and the victim. The caster need not have seen/met the victim, since it is the power of their god that is providing the link. Once a day, the victim can be caused physical harm by driving pins into the effigy, at 1D4 damage per pin. The caster can attempt to kill the victim outright by breaking off the head of the effigy. In this case, the victim gets a Persistence roll to avoid death. On a failed Persistence test, the victim dies. On a successful Persis- tence roll, the effigy no longer has any power over the victim.  ▶   Whirlwind  Magnitude 1, Progressive, Duration 15 Minutes [Religions: Storm] Each point of Magnitude of this spell whips up a whirlwind that is 10 metres tall and is capable of carry- ing 20 SIZ in its whirling vortex. Each round the Whirl- wind moves ten metres per point, in a random direction (use a D8 to determine direction, with 1 being North and 5 being South, progressing clockwise round the di- rections). If a character is hit by the Whirlwind, make a Dodge roll to avoid being caught up in it. Characters who are caught are whipped off their feet, D6 metres into the vortex. Each round roll a D6:  1-2: Carried up D10 metres (if already at the top, blown out the whirlwind the additional height be- fore falling to earth (taking damage).  3-4: Stay at the height they are.  5-6: Fall D6 down in the vortex. If this takes them to the ground they take falling damage.  76   Chapter 9.   Divine Magic

=== PAGE 79 ===

PartIII Game Master

=== PAGE 80 ===

CHAPTER 10  Adventuring  10.1 Spot Rules  This selection of rules is designed to deal with individual situations that may crop up throughout the game.  10.1.1   ⋆   Travel  The rates given below are based on average movement rates.   If you need to precisely determine which of two groups reached a destination first, use an Opposed Ath- letics (for walking) or Riding test.  Type   Rate/day   Notes  Hiking   50km   Ten hours of steady walk- ing on road or path with no wagons or animals.   Need to make Fatigue Test at the end of the Hike to avoid be- coming Fatigued. Marching   30km   Marching   in   organised groups for ten hours, ready to fight at the end of the day. No need for a Fatigue test   at   the   end   of   the march. Riding Slow   30km   Moving at a walk accom- panied by pack animals and wagons. Riding   50km   Casual riding. Riding Fast   90km   Riding fast with no wagons. Both mount and rider need to make a Fatigue test at the end of the day.  Table 10.1: Daily Travel Rates The above rates should also be modified by the type of terrain being crossed.  Terrain   Movement Adjustment  Road/Path   100% of normal rate Light brush   80% of normal rate Medium brush   70% of normal rate Light woods   70% of normal rate Rolling Hills   70% of normal rate Heavy woodland   50% of normal rate  Example   Radius  Candle or embers   1m Torch or lantern   3m Campfire   5m Bonfire   10m  Table 10.2: Illuminating Items  10.1.2   ⋆   Illumination & Darkness  Table 10.2 and Table 10.3 give examples light sources and how different levels of illumination and darkness may affect the characters.  ▶   Night Vision  This allows the character to see at night as well as during the day.   Normally possessed by subterranean or dark- ness aligned creatures.  ▶   Night Sight  This ability allows the character to treat partial darkness as illuminated and darkness as only partial darkness. This is normally possessed by nocturnal creatures.  ▶   Blind Sight  The ability of some animals to fight as if sighted although they are not.   For example, using ground vibrations, echolocation, acute hearing or scent.   The exact reason would typically be described in parenthesis, e.g.   Blind Sight (Echolocation).  10.1.3   ⋆   Fatigue  Combat, sprinting, climbing, swimming against a strong current, are all examples of when a character can become fatigued and tired. If the Gamemaster thinks that a character has been engaged in an activity that may have drained him of physical energy, then they may call for a Resilience roll. If the character fails the roll they suffer the effects of Fatigue.  78   Chapter 10.   Adventuring

=== PAGE 81 ===

Environtment   Example   Effects  Brightly Illuminated   Blazing summer day   None. Illuminated   Heavy candlelit room, overcast day, within ra- dius of illuminating item None. Partial Darkness   Cavern mouth, misty day, within 3 x radius of illuminating item (see below). -1P to vision-based Perception tests and com- bat attacks. Darkness   Large cavern illuminated only by embers, foggy day, within 5 x radius of illuminating item. -2P to vision-based Perception tests and com- bat attacks. Movement rate halved. Pitch Black   Sealed room with stone walls,   cavern many miles   underground,   supernatural   darkness, mountaintop whiteout. Perception tests reliant on vision become near impossible, as are ranged attacks. Close combat attacks suffer three Penalty dice (-3P). Move- ment rate a quarter of normal.  Table 10.3: Illumination & Darkness  Example  Rurik has just been in a long, ten round, combat against a group of bandits. Although he has emerged victorious, the Gamemaster rules that Rurik has to roll a successful Resilience test or become Fatigued.  This test is usually made after the activity has been completed, unless the activity is long and drawn out and there is a real danger that Fatigue will stop the task being completed successfully.   For example, on a long hard march the characters are pressing on ahead so that they can reach a fort before an enemy army arrives there. In this case there is a real danger that they will arrive not only too late but tired and worn down.  ▶   The Effects of Fatigue  If a character fails the Resilience test then they become fatigued. All skill tests suffer a Penalty die. Also move- ment rate drops by a quarter.   The character also be- comes sluggish, DEX and INT are each reduced by three points for the purposes of determining Combat Order. If the fatigued character insists on engaging in heavy activity, such as combat, heavy labour or running, then another Resilience roll is made with a Penalty die (-1P). If the character fails this second skill test they become heavily fatigued and all the above penalties are doubled (two Penalty dice (-2P)). If a character fumbles any of their Resilience rolls, then they immediately fall unconscious for 3D6 minutes and upon waking are still fatigued.  ▶   Recovering from Fatigue  A character who completely rests for 20-CON hours will remove the effects of any Fatigue. Certain Powers might also help remove the effects of Fatigue.  10.1.4   ⋆   Exposure, Starvation and Thirst  ▶   Exposure  A character can normally survive for a number of hours equal to his CON before suffering from exposure.  ▶   Starvation  A character can survive for a number of days equal to his CON before becoming starved, though after three days they will begin to suffer a Penalty die (-1P) to Fatigue tests.  ▶   Thirst  A character can survive for a number of hours equal to his CON x 2 before becoming chronically thirsty, though particularly arid environments may reduce this to CON x 1 or even CON x 1/2.  ▶   Effects and Remedy  Whenever a character is suffering from exposure, starva- tion or thirst, a Fatigue test is required with a Penalty die (-1P). In addition, the character will automatically  79 Chapter 10.   Adventuring

=== PAGE 82 ===

suffer one 1D6 of damage every day, for every condi- tion he is experiencing.   Natural healing will not heal this damage – only sufficient shelter, food or water can remedy the problem and allow natural healing to take place.  10.1.5   ⋆   Healing  Healing can be performed in one of two ways – using the First Aid skill or through natural healing, resting while the injuries heal themselves.  10.1.6   ⋆   Natural Healing  A character’s Minor injuries regain CON/4 hit point per 24 hours, as long as the character does not engage in anything more than light activity. Natural healing will not improve Major Wounds. A Major Wound requires treatment with a successful Heal- ing test. Once this is done Major Wounds heal at a rate of one hit point per day, as long as the character does not engage in anything more than light activity, and the character succeeds a daily Resilience test.  10.1.7   ⋆   Encumbrance  Every piece of equipment in the Equipment chapter has an Encumbrance (ENC) score, apart from those items that are too small or light. Characters can usually ignore the effects on Encumbrance that these light items have until they start to carry a lot of them – assume that an average of 20 such items will equal 1 ENC, on the basis that the character has a suitable means of carrying them, such as a sack or backpack. A character can carry equipment whose total ENC is less than or equal to his STR+SIZ without penalty. Encumbrance is a measure of not only weight but also bulk of the item, reflecting the awkwardness of handling the item. Roughly 1 ENC is equal to 1/4 of a SIZ point.  ▶   Overloading  A character carrying total ENC greater than his STR+SIZ is Overloaded.  Overloaded characters suffer a Penalty die (-1P) to all tests that require physical actions, including Weapon skill tests and most tests that have DEX or STR as a Characteristic.  Overloaded characters have their Movement halved. They also suffer a -1P to all Fatigue tests. A character cannot carry more than twice his STR+SIZ in ENC.  10.1.8   ⋆   Falling  A character that takes damage from a fall ends up prone. Armour points do not reduce falling damage. A charac- ter takes 1D6 damage per full 3m fallen. As long as the character was not surprised, they may attempt an Athletics test to mitigate falling damage. A  Substance Inhaled   Damage Taken  Water   2D6 Vacuum   2D6 Thick Smoke   1D6 Poison Gas   Character is exposed to the poison. If the gas is also a thick smoke, then 1D6 damage is incurred in addition to the poison’s effect.  Table 10.4: Suffocating Substance  Damage Source   Example   Damage/CR  Flame   Candle   1 point Large Flame   Torch   1D4 points Small Fire   Camp fire   1D6 points Large Fire   Scolding   steam, large   bonfires, burning rooms 2D6 points Inferno   Lava,   inside   a blast furnace 3D6 points  Table 10.5: Fire and Heat successful test allows the character to treat the fall as if it were two metres shorter than it actually is. In addition, as long as this test is a success and the character is not reduced to 0 hit points due to the fall, the character lands safely and is not prone. If the roll is a critical then miraculously no damage is taken. If the roll is a fumble then the maximum possible damage is taken. Characters falling onto soft surfaces may have the distance they fall effectively halved for the purposes of damage.  10.1.9   ⋆   Suffocation  While underwater or moving through a poison gas cloud a character can hold his breath for a number of Combat Rounds equal to his CON. Once a character has surpassed the time for which he can hold his breath, he must make a Resilience test every round with a cumulative Penalty die (-1P). If he fails, he automatically starts inhaling the suffocating substance. Armour points do not reduce suffocation damage. The damage will only cease once the character can draw breathable air once more. Even then, the character will require a Resilience test to be able to do anything other than wretch or gasp for breath for 1D4 Combat Rounds.  10.1.10   ⋆   Burning  The amount of damage per Combat Round suffered from fire or heat will depend on its intensity, as shown on the Fire and Heat Table.   Metal armour, such as Plate or Chain mail, does not subtract from the rolled damage.  80   Chapter 10.   Adventuring

=== PAGE 83 ===

10.1.11   ⋆   Poison  Plants and creatures have developed poisons as a method of protecting themselves against predators.   They are also used by assassins and wrong doers of all kinds to murder their victims. Every type of poison has the fol- lowing information detailed:  Name:   The poison’s name.   Also, if the poison is not natural, it will be mentioned here.  Type:   Lists whether the poison is ingested, used on a weapon, or inhaled.  Delay:   The time between the poison’s introduction to a character, to the time its effect takes hold.  Potency:   This is a number between 10 and 100 that measures the strength of a poison. Some supernatural poisons, like Basilisk Venom, have even higher Poten- cies.   A character must make an opposed Resilience test versus the poison’s Potency test in order to avoid or mitigate the damage of the poison.  Effect:   Usually hit point damage, though this is not universal.   Some poisons cause a character to sleep for a period of time. More exotic poisons may cause hallucinogenic effects, paralysis or a combination of effects. These take place after the delay noted above.  Duration:   How long the poison, if effective, will affect the victim.   The effects of the poison cannot be re- moved or healed until the poison itself has been neu- tralised or has dissipated in the victim’s system. Hit point damage caused by poison will recover through natural healing. The character’s Resilience and the Poison’s potency are rolled against each other similar to opposed skill checks.  ▶   Example: Gorgon Serpent Venom  Type: Ingested or smeared Delay: 1D3 Combat Rounds Potency: 34 Effect: 1D3 hit point damage and -3 penalty to CON Duration: 6D10 minutes Other poisons: Viper Venom, Belladonna, Mushrooms, Scorpion Sting, Pokeweed or Holly Berries, etc.  10.1.12   ⋆   Disease  Disease is a source of threat in fantasy worlds, either from diseases that ravage the land from time to time or even supernatural diseases.   Every type of disease has the following information detailed:  Name:   The disease’s name. Also, if the disease is not natural, it will be mentioned here.  Type:   Lists whether the disease is spread through con- tamination, touch or is airborne.  Object   Armour Points   Hit Points  Boulder   4   40 Castle gate   4   120 Castle wall (2m)   5   250 Hut wall (2m)   2   15 Iron door   4   75 Wooden chair   2   6 Wooden door   2   25  Table 10.6: Inanimate Objects  Delay:   The time between the diseases introduction to a character, to the time its effect takes hold. It is also the time following disease contraction that a victim will be forced to make follow-up opposed disease tests.  Potency:   This is a number between 10 and 100 that measures the strength of a disease. Some supernatu- ral diseases, like the shining plague, have even higher Potencies.   A character must make an opposed Re- silience test versus the disease’s Potency test in order to avoid or mitigate the damage of the disease.  Effect:   Usually hit point damage, though this is not universal. Many diseases will apply a penalty to Char- acteristics or skills.   More exotic diseases may cause hallucinogenic effects, paralysis or a combination of effects. These take place after the delay noted above. The effects of the disease cannot be removed or healed until the disease itself has been neutralised or has dissi- pated in the victim’s system. Hit point damage caused by disease will recover through natural healing.  ▶   Example: The Shakes  Type: Touch Delay: 1-2 days Potency: 50 Effect: This flu-like disease renders its victims in a cold and constantly shaking state, during which DEX is halved. Also for each day that the victim suffers from the Shakes they take 1D6 hit points of damage. Other diseases: Typhoid, Cholera, Leprosy, Rabies, Malaria, Tuperculosis, Trachoma, etc.  10.1.13   ⋆   Inanimate Objects  All inanimate objects have armour points and hit points. Except in the most unusual of circumstances, attacks on inanimate objects will automatically hit – characters simply need to work out how much damage they deal. The object’s armour points will be deducted from any damage dealt as normal, with the remainder being applied to its hit points.   Once an object’s hit points have been reduced to zero, it is smashed and useless. Note that weapons will get damaged, even break, when repeatedly hitting hard inanimate objects.  81 Chapter 10.   Adventuring

=== PAGE 84 ===

CHAPTER 11  Gamemaster Tools  Gamemasters typically need to know more rules than the players. They need to handle situations that go be- yond a single character, like doing mass battles or travel- ling by ships, optional creature plunder, etc. This chap- ter consolidates such rules for the benefit of Gamemas- ters.  11.1 Plunder Rating  Although Fantasy Crux is not a game of ‘Killing Things and Taking their Stuff’, it is sometimes useful and ex- pected that creatures that the Player Characters meet upon their adventures will have treasure, both mundane and magical. Normally the needs of the story can dictate what treasure and supernatural items a creature possesses, but if a quick random roll is necessary the following guidelines can be consulted. Each creature has a Plunder Rating which is a rat- ing of how much treasure the creature is likely to be carrying.   For creatures that form groups, increase the Plunder Rating by at least one, for groups of up to 20 creatures, by two for larger groups of up to a hundred creatures, and by 3 for groups of over a hundred. In this case the Plunder will be held in a defended and guarded treasure room which the leader of the creatures will have access to. The following table has a list of potential treasure for creatures depending on their Plunder Rating.   If appli- cable (e.g.   campaign has supernatural Disciplines, like magic) also roll for the supernatural items.  11.2 Ships and Sailing  11.2.1   ⋆   Construction  There are, broadly speaking, three types of sailing ship: sloops (small, fast, but comparatively fragile one-masted vessels), brigs (fast and manoeuvrable two-masted ves- sels), and ships (larger vessels with at least three masts, whether warships or cargo vessels). Weapons are handled abstractly; ship-mounted weap- ons are not accurate, and large numbers of shots are fired in order to have a chance to hit an enemy ship. Thus a ship’s weapons are rated abstractly as a single percent- age chance to hit an enemy vessel in combat; almost certainly many weapons are fired for each “hit roll”. A hit generally does D8 damage, subtracted from the other ship’s structure points.  Plunder Rating   Treasure Found  0   Not a hoarder. No treasure whatso- ever. 1   Chance hoarder.   A couple of cop- pers, loose change (1D6 CPs). Very remote (05%) chance of a supernat- ural item, which is either used by ac- cident (my lucky talisman) or which the creature is completely oblivious to. 2   Hoards   enough   for   a   rainy   day. About 5D20 in SPs, 1D10 GPs.   If the creature has supernatural abili- ties, there is a POW % chance of 1D4 Minor supernatural items ap- propriate to the type. 3   Hoards for a better future. Collects treasure for its worth and appreci- ates its value. 5D100 in SPs, 3D20 in GPs.   If the creature has super- natural abilities, there is a POW X 2% chance of 1D4 appropriate Mi- nor supernatural items. 4   Significant hoard. Hoards for hoard- ing’s   sake.   10D100   SPs,   1D100 GPs.   POW   X   3%   of   1D6   Mi- nor supernatural items and POW % chance of 1D4 Major supernatural items. 5   Treasure trove. The wealth of a mi- nor Lord. Examples: Grave goods of a dead noble worth about 1D6 thou- sand Silver Pieces, with 1D6 Minor supernatural Items and POW X 3% chance of 1D6 Major supernatural Items. 6   Wealth of Kings.   eg.   Dragon’s Hoard, a hoard almost beyond com- prehension 1D4 Million Silver pieces, 2D10 Minor,   1D8 Major and one unique supernatural item.  Table 11.1: Plunder  82   Chapter 11.   Gamemaster Tools

=== PAGE 85 ===

Every 10% in weapons reduces cargo capacity by 2 tons, and means two extra crew are needed. The weap- ons level cannot be increased above 100%. Even beyond weapons carried, not all ships are iden- tical; any ship will have one of the following special fea- tures.   It might have more than one such feature; in this case, add +50% of the original cost to the total cost per feature added.  Armoured:   AP 2 against any attacks.  Fast:   Add +1 knot to speed.  Heavy Weapons:   Hits from weapons do D12 rather than D8 damage.  High Capacity:   Increase the cargo size by +40%.  Manoeuvrable:   Add +20% to manoeuvrability.  Marines:   The ship can carry (and provide board and lodging for) a number of marines equal to the size of its crew.  Ram:   The ship can ram other vessels in combat without suffering damage.  Reduced Crew:   The crew size needed to run the ship (as indicated table 11.2) is halved.  11.2.2   ⋆   Sailing Tests  Most potential manoeuvres a vessel can make are gov- erned by the captain’s Sailing skill, modified by the ma- noeuvrability of the vessel.   A further modifier is the average Sailing skill level of the crew:  25% or less (no idea)   Penalty die (-1P) 26%-50% (competent)   - 51%-75% (veteran)   Bonus die (+1B) 76% or more (expert)   two Bonus dice (+2B)  11.2.3   ⋆   Travel  In normal sailing conditions, a sailing vessel can move 20 miles per day per knot of speed.   Speeds given are averages.   Very   favourable   conditions – for example a   good   strong wind in the desired direction of travel (possibly magically arranged) – can double these speeds. As can a rowing crew who critical their Rowing skill test. On the other hand, if a ship is becalmed, with no wind at all, it cannot move. Every day out of sight of land there is a 5% chance of a storm. Storms do 2D6 structure points of damage to a ship; a ship reduced to zero structure points be- gins to sink (and will sink almost instantly if its struc- ture points are reduced to the negative of the origi- nal amount). Further, sailors on deck must make Dodge  tests to stay on board; a sailor swept overboard and not immediately rescued must make an Athletics test to sur- vive. Fortunately, the captain can make a Sailing test (mod- ified by manoeuvrability) to halve damage from a storm. Better yet, it is possible to plot a course to avoid an in- coming storm if it is detected in time (perhaps using magic or skills such as Natural Lore).  11.2.4   ⋆   Naval Combat  We consider two ranges of distance between ships.  ▶   Contact  The vessels can see each other. If both vessels wish to close to combat range, or leave contact, this action is of course automatic, and takes about an hour. If the vessels want different things, roll opposed Sail- ing tests, as above.  ▶   Combat Range  Combat between ships is similar to normal combat. Ini- tiative is decided for each ship, rather than between in- dividuals, by saying that the vessel with the better speed goes first. A single test is made to fire a ship’s weapons; no defence roll is made against these attacks. If desired, a character can be appointed weapons officer; he oversees the firing of a ship’s weapons.   That character should make a Ranged Combat skill test; if the test succeeds, the ship’s weapons test gains a Bonus die (+1B). Hand-held weapons are too small to have any effect on an opposing ship, but can be used against those on the decks. Fire is the exception to this rule, being used to set flamable objects, such as decks, and sails, on fire. The following special manoeuvres can be made by  83 Chapter 11.   Gamemaster Tools

=== PAGE 86 ===

Type of Ship   Crew   Cost (SP)   Manoeuvrability   Speed   Structure Points Cargo  One-masted   10   5000   +20%   6 Knots   20   8 Tons Two-masted   20   15000   -   5 Knots   40   15 Tons Three-masted   30   50000   -20%   4 Knots   60   30 Tons  Table 11.2: Ship Types a ship in combat range. One manoeuvre is allowed per round. Each manoeuvre needs a Sailing skill test by the captain, as indicated above.  ▶   Broadside  If the skill test succeeds, two attacks with a ship’s weap- ons can be made instead of one.  ▶   Evade  If the Sailing test succeeds, the opponent cannot use the broadside, ram, or boarding manoeuvres.   Further, the vessel can escape combat range (out to contact range) if the other vessel allows it or the Sailing test succeeds as an opposed roll.  ▶   Ram  The other vessel is rammed if an opposed Sailing test succeeds. A ramming attack does D6 points of damage per mast. If the ship performing this manoeuvre lacks a battering ram, it also takes half the damage inflicted.  ▶   Boarding  Boarding is possible if an opposed Sailing test succeeds. In this case, the vessels are roped together, and boarding can commence. A free boarding test is allowed immedi- ately after a successful ramming manoeuvre if desired. If both vessels want to board the other, this is auto- matic.  11.3 Mass Combat  The following rules can be used if you want a one roll solution to a battle. Mass combat involves the commanders’ skills of the two opposing sides, modified by the armies involved. The command skills involved are Lore (Military Tactics), and either Influence or Performance. The actual battle is resolved by opposed Lore (Mil- itary Tactics) tests made by the leaders.   A successful test means a force inflicts casualties equal to half its size on the opposition. Half of these casualties are deaths; the other half are injuries. These numbers are doubled on a critical success. Further, the commander of a losing side in a battle must make an Influence or Performance test to prevent a rout.   Routing troops either flee in panic, or surren- der when they cannot flee. A further 10% of an army’s numbers are lost in a rout.   A critical success on the Influence or Performance test is needed for a force to continue fighting rather than retreating in a more or- derly manner.   If a force has nowhere to retreat to, it can continue to fight. The Lore (Military Tactics) test is modified by vari- ous situational factors:  Better equipped than enemy: Bonus die (+1B).  Better trained than enemy: Bonus die (+1B).  Has significant special forces (e.g. artillery, cavalry, combat mages) that the enemy lacks:   Bonus die (+1B) for each.  Outnumber enemy by two to one or more: Bonus die (+1B).  Outnumber enemy by four to one or more:   two Bonus dice (+2B).  Enemy in defensive position: Penalty die (-1P).  Enemy fortifications: two Penalty dice (-2P).  Player character heroics (eg: taking out significant enemy, capturing strategic position):   Bonus die (+1B), or Penalty die (-1P) if attempted heroics go horribly wrong. Larger forces might split into several armies, each with their own commander. The rules are still as above, but each army must pick another force to attack.  11.4 Skill Tests  11.4.1   ⋆   When to Test  When the outcome of the character’s action is in doubt or they want to push themselves beyond their expected capacity. If it’s not clear that a character can perform a task, then Gamemaster is well within their rights to call for a skill test. When it is dramatically appropriate and raises ten- sion in the game.   Think carefully before asking for a skill test. Skill tests should be like those moments in a thriller where you are on the edge of your seat and the story could go either way. If the overall result of asking for a skill test is that it will provide the player a success of minor import, such as a minor scrap of information  84   Chapter 11.   Gamemaster Tools

=== PAGE 87 ===

on a Lore roll, just give the player the success without asking them to roll. If the situation is more life or death, describe it as such, highlighting the tension, and ask for a skill test.   Where there are definite consequences to a failed skill test, such as falling down a pit filled with spikes if an Athletics skill test is failed, the player should be warned before the character risks taking the action.  11.4.2   ⋆   When not to Test  As a replacement for good story telling and roleplaying. If the game is flowing nicely as a result of the players and Gamemaster engaging in conversation and weaving a strong exciting story which is keeping everyone happy and entertained through roleplaying, then think twice about breaking that mood by asking for a skill test. Simply to provide drama and tension in game. The Gamemaster should never substitute a good description of the scene that the players find themselves in, for a series of dice rolls. If a similar skill test has just been made. It is tempt- ing to ask for a series of skill tests to simulate a difficult or arduous task, such as climbing an especially difficult cliff, or tracking an opponent through a dense jungle. Don’t.   All this does is break player immersion in the game, creating frustration and boredom as several mean- ingless rolls are made. Instead, ask for a single skill test and modify it to reflect the difficulty of the task.   Do not ask for another until the circumstances significantly change.  11.4.3   ⋆   Group Tests  To save time and keep the game flow a GM may consider a Group test. This is appropriate in cases were all the players need to roll and any one of them failing makes the whole group fail. For example, if the group is rolling for Deception to stealtily move through an area you can have only the player with the lowest Deception roll. Similarly, if 8 guards all have to roll Perception to spot the characters, the GM may judge that rolling only for the guard with the highest Perception (maybe with a bonus, since the other guards aid him) is enough to determine the result.  11.4.4   ⋆   Sorting Tests  Another type of time-saving techique may apply when the GM needs to sort out which NPCs succeed with something or not according to their skill.   For exam- ple, several NPCs try to jump from rooftop to rooftop. The GM may roll only once and apply this roll to all the NPCs according to their Athletics skill.  11.5 Fantasy Races  Most fantasy campaigns will have exotic races as Player Character options. The exact nature of these races will depend on the campaign itself, e.g. Elves in the Tolkien saga are quite different than Elves in the Greyhawk cam- paign setting. The Creatures chapter introduction (page 88) ex- plains how any creature could be used as a base to create Player Characters. However, a lot of them would not be balanced and the Gamemaster needs to be careful on what races will be allowed in the campaign. However, some races like Elves, Dwarves or Lizard- men are quite straightforward.   Note that when those races have special abilities (e.g. Elves have Night Sight and are Exceptional Archers) they have to spend some of their initial Improvement Points to get that race. That would keep it more balanced for Human characters. Gamemasters have the final say as usual. The following sections contain Elves and Dwarves as examples.  11.5.1   ⋆   Elves  The creature entry for Elves (page 95) has their average Characteristics as well as the dice rolled for the Ran- dom Characteristics method. For the point method the starting Characteristics will be analogous to their dice (averaging 8).   For example: STR 6, CON 8, DEX 10, SIZ 6, INT 10, POW 8 and CHA 8. Players would then allocate 30 points on top of that. Remember that the racial top is the maximum pos- sible value plus 3. Thus, Elves can reach a maximum of DEX 27 but only STR 18. Finally, Elves have Night Sight and are Exceptional Archers. These are useful abilities that would cost 3 Im- provement Points each and thus Elf characters will have no extra Improvement Points available during creation.  11.5.2   ⋆   Dwarves  The creature entry for Dwarves (page 94) has their aver- age Characteristics as well as the dice rolled for the Ran- dom Characteristics method. For the point method the starting Characteristics will be analogous to their dice  85 Chapter 11.   Gamemaster Tools

=== PAGE 88 ===

(averaging 8). For example: STR 10, CON 12, DEX 6, SIZ 4, INT 8, POW 8 and CHA 8. Players would then allocate 30 points on top of that. Remember that the racial top is the maximum pos- sible value plus 3. Thus, Dwarves can reach a maximum of STR and CON of 27. Finally, Dwarves have Thermoception and Earth Sense. Thermoception is pretty powerful so the player would need to spend 4 Improvement Points to get it.   Earch Sense is situational and 2 Improvement Points would be enough.   Thus Dwarf characters will have no extra Im- provement Points available during creation.  11.6 Player Archetypes  The rules allow for an incredible variety of player char- acter concepts.   Everything a player can think can be accommodated with the provided rules.   To this end, Folk Magic (see chapter 7) can be used to emulate new abilities as supernatural feats rather than consider them as magic (since some players will not want to use magic as it conflicts with their character’s concept).   In this section we provide one such example by describing how a Monk character could be designed.  11.6.1   ⋆   Concept: Monk  Characters trained in the monastic traditions will be able to achieve some supernatural feats. These characters will go through extensive training to learn special techiques to represent what they have learned in the monastery.  ▶   Rules  The Player can, of course, use the Battle discipline to improve his fighting abilities but to emulate some of the special monk abilities we can use the Folk Magic disci- pline. The Player needs to pay Improvement Points to get the Folk Magic discipline and then pay IPs for each Magnitude of spells he is learning. The rules and max- imum Magnitude they can learn is exactly as the Folk Magic discipline. The Player character will not be cast- ing spells but all the effects of spell casting need to be emulated. For example it should be obvious for anyone that is seeing the Monk that he is initiating something and under duress they may not succeed. Flavour is important, so the abilities can be named accordingly. For example, the Player could pay to get the ‘Monastic’ discipline and then learn individual monastic ‘feats’.   Achieving a specific feat requires intense focus and meditation and sometimes distractions might cause failure (explaining why the ‘Monastic’ or ‘Ki Focus’ skill check is required).  ▶   Feats  The following example feats (spells) can be learned from the monastery: Coordination, Cover Blind Side, Cushion Fall, Extra Defense, Fist of the Wind, Flying Kick, Heal, Ironmind, Leap, Mobility, Multi Attack, Resist (Ele- ment), Spirit Shield, Strength, and Weapon Enhance. Note, however, that they can only be applied to ‘self’ and never to others; for this reason the Gamemaster may eschew the Folk Magic Discipline IPs or otherwise balance the spell limitation.  11.7 Traits, Talents, Feats  Certain campaign concepts might allow characters to get some extraordinary or supernatural abilities with- out focusing on a specific discipline. Maybe the charac- ter wants some special talent interwoven with his back- ground and the Gamemaster allows him, only once dur- ing character creation, to get such an ability.   Maybe even later under certain circumstances.   Or, more sim- ply, it might be possible to add magical runes or tattoos to characters that allow them to manifest certain powers.  11.7.1   ⋆   Rules  To enable such mechanics Gamemasters might allow cer- tain Folk Magic spells to be cast as a spell-like ability once per day, or more, and activated with a Combat Action.   This is similar to how permanent charms are created with the Create Charms spell. The player spends three Improvement Points per Mag- nitude to enable them to use the spell as an ability once per day (1/day); without requiring a Folk Magic Casting skill or any Power. It can be activated as an Action. The player spends ten Improvement Points per Mag- nitude to have the effect of the spell always active. This is quite powerful and care must be taken. In any case, not all spells can be used for such talents and the Game- master has the final say.  86   Chapter 11.   Gamemaster Tools

=== PAGE 89 ===

11.8 Minor NPCs  This does not necessarily mean weak non-player charac- ters. They are just NPCs not important enough to have a proper description.   It can be used as an aid when improvising NPCs during play but they are primarily useful to quickly describe minor NPCs in writing. The description comprises a brief description of the NPC followed by their specialty skill, followed by the items and/or abilities.   Typically minor NPCs have 10 HPs and 10 Combat Order but the Gamemaster can increase, when appropriate. Skills closely related to the description are at the spe- cialty skill level and all other skills at -10% increments depending on how relevant they are.   Effectively, the Gamemaster needs to reduce the skill level as appropri- ate for the role envisioned. Example  Human Guard 50 (Shortsword 1D6+1, Leather 2)  This guard is quite good at his job.   He could have 50% in Close Combat and 50% in Perception. He could have 40% in Dodge, Resilience and Ranged Weapons but only 30% in Persistence. Other skills would be even lower. The guard is armed with a Shortsword and wears Leather armour which gives 2 AP. Another example of an elven scholar demonstrates the potential skills more. Example  Elven Scholar 70 (Dagger 1D4+1, 2gp, Amulet of Pro- tection 2)  The scholar could have 70% in a couple of Lore skills and/or Languages but only 40% in her Close Combat skill.   She could have a 60% Persistence or even Heal- ing, etc. Also note how her magical amulet containing a Protection 2 Folk Magic spell is described. Finally, extraordinary and supernatural abilities can be described with a brief Discipline abbreviation and then the appropriate Powers.   For Disciplines, B is for Battle, FM is for Folk Magic, AM for Arcane Magic, DM for Divine Magic, etc. Example  Goblin Witch Doctor 60 (Dagger 1D4+1; FM: Heal, Scare, Sap Energy)  The goblin witch doctor could have a 60% at his Heal- ing Skill and a 50% in his Folk Magic Casting skill. He probably has a 40% in Persistence, Resilience and Dodge and knows 3 Folk Magic spells: Heal, Scare and Sap En- ergy.  11.9 Epic Characters  For a more heroic style of play, where the adventures of the PCs are of a more epic nature (with characters facing off against a whole host of foes, and perhaps becoming the great heroes of their time), the players and the GM might like to implement the following changes, or some variation of, to character creation:  Epic Hit Points: The total HPs will equal Size plus Constitution.  Epic Characteristics: The players can allocate 35 points to Characteristics and the maximum is in- creased to +5 instead of +3.  Epic Skills: The maximum Skill increase at char- acter creation is 50 points instead of 30. Skills at Master level (above 100%) are increased by 2% in- stead of 1%.  At the end of character generation each character gains an additional 6 Improvement Points to spend as they wish.  87 Chapter 11.   Gamemaster Tools

=== PAGE 90 ===

CHAPTER 12  Creatures  In Fantasy Crux, monsters can be as richly detailed as the characters themselves.   As well as characteris- tics they have skills, weapons and supernatural abilities. They are not mere cannon fodder to be killed and looted. They have their own motives that often bring them into conflict with the player characters, and if sentient can be used to create player characters. This chapter contains several creatures grouped in lists according to their special characteristics; animals, spirits, undead, etc. It is encouraged (if not strongly rec- ommended) that Game Masters create campaign-specific monsters using this section’s material as examples. Monsters as Player Characters Although in theory many of the monsters in this chapter can be used as player characters the follow- ing are especially suited:   Dwarf, Elf, Goblin, Orc, Lizardman. The following characteristics, attributes, skills, and special rules, collectively known as a ‘Stat block’, for each of the creatures listed on the Monsters List, are the bare bones of a creature. You can use them straight away to give an average non-descript member of that race. To create creatures that truly fit the adage “Mon- sters are People too”, take the Stat block and use it as a base for a complete character.   Think of a concept for the character and then add the skills, characteristics and supernatural abilities that the character needs. You may want to generate the creature character as if it was a player character.   This often creates good opposition for the players, since the creature will be of comparable experience. Note that you should be careful with increasing en- counter difficulty by increasing numbers of monsters. A much better way is to increase the power of individual monsters, by increasing skills and supernatural abilities, to be closer to the player character power level.   Fantasy Crux combat works best when there is roughly the same amount of monsters as player characters.  88   Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 91 ===

12.1 Animals  This list describes more mundane animals.   It lists do- mestic animals (such as horses and dogs), as well as wild beasts.   Some of the animals are in their ‘Giant’ form, which are more threatening opponents than their normal species. None of the animals listed here have any treasure by design.   They may have some as determined by the Gamemaster as fits the needs of the story. For example a carnivore may have a few trinkets in the remains of its previous meals. All the Animals listed here are of fixed INT and therefore not sentient. They have a Dodge, Persistence and Resilience of DEX x3, Pow x3, CON x3 respectively and none of them have any supernatural abilities.  Ant (Giant)  Hit Points   12  Major Wound   6  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   6  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   Chitin (5 AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  4D6 (14)   3D6+6 (17)   2D6+6 (13)   2D6 (7)   2 (2)   1D6+3 (6)   5 (5)  Skills  Unarmed Combat 50%.   Bite (1D6)  Bear  Hit Points   19  Major Wound   10  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   23m  Armor   Tough hide (3 AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  3D6+15 (25)   2D6+6 (13)   3D6 (11)   3D6+15 (25)   5 (5)   3D6 (11)   5 (5)  Skills  Unarmed   Combat   60%.   Bite   (1D8+2D6),   Claw (1D6+2D6)  Bull  Hit Points   15  Major Wound   8  Damage Modifier   +1D6  Power Points   7  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   Hide (2 AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  4D6+6 (20)   2D6+9 (15)   2D6 (7)   2D6+9 (15)   4 (4)   2D6 (7)   4 (4)  Skills  Unarmed Combat 40%.   Charge (1D8+1D6), Trample (1D8+1D6)  Crocodile  Hit Points   15  Major Wound   8  Damage Modifier   +1D6  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   7m, 2m in water  Armor   Thick hide (5 AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  5D6+12 (30)   3D6+12 (19)   3D6 (11)   4D6 (14)   3 (3)   3D6 (11)   3 (3)  Skills  Unarmed Combat 50%.   Bite (1D8+1D6)  Dog  Hit Points   7  Major Wound   4  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   9  Movement Rate   23m  Armor   None  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  2D6+6 (13)   3D6 (11)   2D6+6 (13)   1D6 (3)   5 (5)   1D6+6 (9)   5 (5)  Skills  Unarmed Combat 40%.   Bite (1D6)  89 Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 92 ===

Elephant  Hit Points   36  Major Wound   18  Damage Modifier   +5D6  Power Points   13  Movement Rate   23m  Armor   Thick hide (3 AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  6D6+24 (45)   3D6+15 (24)   3D6 (11)   6D6+30 (48)   6 (6)   2D6+6 (13)   5 (5)  Skills  Unarmed Combat 45%.   Trample (1D12+5D6), Tusk (1D10+5D6)  Hawk  Hit Points   3  Major Wound   2  Damage Modifier   -1D6  Power Points   7  Movement Rate   15m, 30m flying  Armor   None  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  1D3 (2)   2D3 (4)   3D6+18 (27)   1D2 (2)   4 (4)   2D6 (7)   4 (4)  Skills  Unarmed Combat 50%.   Claw (1D6-1D6), Bite (1D4- 1D6)  Hawk (Giant)  Hit Points   36  Major Wound   18  Damage Modifier   +4D6  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   23m, 30m flying  Armor   Thick feathers (3 AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  6D6+21 (39)   5D6+15 (33)   3D6+9 (18)   6D6+21 (39)   4 (4)   3D6 (11)   4 (4)  Skills  Unarmed   Combat   80%.   Claw   (1D8+4D6),   Bite (1D6+4D6)  Horse  Hit Points   21  Major Wound   11  Damage Modifier   +2D6  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   30m  Armor   Hide (2 AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  2D6+18 (25)   3D6+6 (17)   2D6+3 (10)   2D6+18 (25)   4 (4)   3D6 (11)   5 (5)  Skills  Unarmed Combat 40%.   Kick (1D6+2D6)  Lion (Big Cat)  Hit Points   15  Major Wound   8  Damage Modifier   +1D6  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   23m  Armor   Hide (2 AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  3D6+12 (24)   3D6 (11)   3D6+6 (17)   2D6+12 (19)   5 (5)   3D6 (11)   5 (5)  Skills  Unarmed   Combat   60%.   Bite   (1D8+1D6),   Claw (1D6+1D6)  Lizard (Giant)  Hit Points   15  Major Wound   8  Damage Modifier   +1D6  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   Hide (2 AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  2D6+12 (19)   3D6 (11)   1D6+12 (15)   2D6+12 (19)   3 (3)   3D6 (11)   3 (3)  Skills  Unarmed   Combat   35%.   Bite   (1D6+1D6),   Tail (1D8+1D6)  90   Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 93 ===

Octupus (Giant)  Hit Points   31  Major Wound   16  Damage Modifier   +4D6  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   7m land, 30m swimming  Armor   Tough skin (4 AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  12D6 (42)   4D6+6 (14)   3D6+12 (23)   12D6 (42)   4 (4)   3D6 (11)   4 (4)  Skills  Unarmed   Combat   50%.   Bite   (1D8+4D6),   Arm (1D4+4D6)  Python (Giant)  Hit Points   11  Major Wound   6  Damage Modifier   +2D6  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   Scales (3 AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  3D6+24 (35)   3D6 (11)   2D6+6 (13)   3D6 (11)   3 (3)   3D6 (11)   3 (3)  Skills  Unarmed Combat 50%.   Bite (1D4+2D6), Constrict (1D8+2D6)  Raven  Hit Points   3  Major Wound   2  Damage Modifier   -1D6  Power Points   7  Movement Rate   15m, 25m flying  Armor   None  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  1D3 (2)   2D3 (4)   3D6+12 (21)   1D2 (2)   5 (5)   2D6 (7)   4 (4)  Skills  Unarmed Combat 35%.   Claw (1D6-1D6), Bite (1D4- 1D6)  Rhinoceros  Hit Points   19  Major Wound   10  Damage Modifier   +2D6  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   23m  Armor   Thick hide (5 AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  2D6+21 (26)   3D6 (11)   2D6 (7)   2D6+21 (26)   3 (3)   3D6 (11)   3 (3)  Skills  Unarmed   Combat   50%.   Bite   (1D6+2D6),   Gore (1D8+2D6), Trample (1D12+2D6)  Spider (Giant)  Hit Points   22  Major Wound   11  Damage Modifier   +1D6  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   15m on land, 23m in web  Armor   Chitin (4 AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  2D6+12 (19)   3D6+6 (17)   2D6+9 (16)   4D6+12 (26)   8 (8)   3D6 (11)   2 (2)  Skills  Unarmed Combat 50%.   Bite (1D6+1D6+Venom), Web  Abilities  Spider Venom.  Type:   Ingested or smeared  Delay:   1D3 Combat Rounds  Potency:   Spider’s CONx3  Full Effect:   1D3 Hit Points per minute and applies –6 penalty to victim’s DEX (upon reaching 0 DEX victim be- comes paralysed)  Duration:   6D10 minutes  Web.   Entangles opponent.   Success is determined by an opposed check of attack roll vs an Athletics roll. If entan- gled, the web can be destroyed (POWx2 Hit Points).  91 Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 94 ===

Viper  Hit Points   7  Major Wound   4  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   13  Movement Rate   30m  Armor   Scales (1 AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  2D6+6 (13)   2D6 (6)   3D6+18 (27)   2D6 (7)   3 (3)   2D6+6 (13)   3 (3)  Skills  Unarmed Combat 60%.   Bite (1D6+Venom)  Abilities  Viper Venom.  Type:   Ingested or smeared  Delay:   1 Combat Round  Potency:   48  Full Effect:   1D4 Hit Points damage for each minute and -3 CON (upon reaching 0 CON victim dies)  Duration:   6D10 minutes  Wolf  Hit Points   12  Major Wound   6  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   23m  Armor   None  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  3D6 (11)   3D6+3 (14)   3D6+3 (13)   2D6+3 (10)   5 (5)   3D6 (11)   5 (5)  Skills  Unarmed Combat 50%.   Bite (1D8), Claw (1D6)  12.2 Monsters  Basilisk  Born   from   the   egg   of   a   cockerel   acted   upon   in   an Alchemist’s   or   witches   cauldron,   this   magical   monster is the product of foul magic.   It is a large lizard with multicoloured scales. Its baleful gaze can kill and its blood is poisonous and corrosive. Basilisks are usually employed as guardians of their master’s treasure.  Hit Points   8  Major Wound   4  Damage Modifier   -1D6  Power Points   16  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   Armour Scales (2AP)  Plunder Rating   5  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  2D3 (4)   2D6+6 (13)   3D6 (11)   1D3 (2)   3 (3)   1D6+12 (16)   3 (3)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   40%,   Persistence   50%,   Re- silience 70%  Knowledge.   Natural lore 40%  Practical.   Athletics 65%, Deception 40%  Ranged Combat 100%.   Death Gaze (Range:   POW in metres)  Unarmed Combat 35%.   Bite (1D6-1D6+poison)  Abilities  Basilisk Venom & Poison Blood.  Type:   Ingested or smeared  Delay:   Immediate  Potency:   65  Full Effect:   1D4 Hit Points damage for each minute and -6 CON (upon reaching 0 CON victim dies)  Duration:   6D10 minutes Any non-magical weapon hitting the basilisk corrodes in the creature’s blood, completely disintegrating after D4 rounds. The basilisk’s poison and corrosive blood are magical ef- fects, which lose their special properties a few minutes after leaving the basilisk’s body, making it virtually impossible to use the creature as a source for making lethal compounds.  92   Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 95 ===

Death Gaze.   A basilisk can kill with a glance.   In com- bat the basilisk glares at a single opponent each round. If the basilisk overcomes the target in an opposed test of its Persistence against the target’s Resilience, the target dies instantly.   Using the gaze attack costs no Power Points, and the basilisk may attack normally in any round in which it uses the gaze attack. This attack penetrates magical de- fences as if it were a Magnitude 6 Folk Magic spell. If the target successfully resists the gaze attack, he is unharmed, though he may certainly be targeted again.  Beastman  Hybrids of animals of beasts and men, they typically take the form of a man with a beast’s head.   Tied to the savagery of nature,   they react with hostility to man’s attempt to clear the wilderness for cultivation.  Hit Points   16  Major Wound   8  Damage Modifier   +1D4  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   Leather (2AP)  Plunder Rating   2  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  2D6+6 (13)   1D6+12 (16)   3D6 (11)   1D6+12 (16)   2D6+6 (13)   3D6 (11)   2D6 (7)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   40%,   Persistence   30%,   Re- silience 30%  Knowledge.   Natural lore 70%  Practical.   Deception 40%  Close   Combat   50%.   Club   (1D6+1D4),   Shortspear (1D6+1D4), Medium Shield (1D6+1D6)  Unarmed Combat 60%.   Head Butt (1D6+1D4)  Abilities  Supernatural.  Beastmen can usually learn 3 Magnitude points of Folk Magic.  Dragon  These giant flying reptilian monsters are incredibly pow- erful   and   dangerous.   Dragons   are   very   individual   in their temperament.   Some are evil cruel beasts.   Others are   solitary   hoarding   creatures.   Some   use   their   high intelligence to lord it over lesser races.  Hit Points   50  Major Wound   25  Damage Modifier   +7D6  Power Points   26  Movement Rate   30m, 45m when flying  Armor   Dragon Scales (12AP)  Plunder Rating   5-6  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  20D6 (70)   10D6 (35)   4D6 (14)   10D6+30 (65)   6D6 (21)   4D6+12 (26)   6D6 (21)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   30%,   Persistence   180%,   Re- silience 120%  Knowledge.   Natural lore 100%, Culture (local) 100%  Practical.   Athletics   120%,   Influence   150%,   Percep- tion 110%  93 Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 96 ===

Unarmed   Combat   125%.   Bite   (1D10+7D6),   Claw (1D8+7D6), Tail (1D20+7D6)  Abilities  Double Claw Attack.   In a single Combat Round a dragon can make two claw attacks.  Breathe Flame.   The Dragon may breathe flame over an area as a Combat Action.   The flame will cover a cone in front of the Dragon, which stretches for its POW in metres.   At its furthest extent, the cone is equal to the creature’s POW in width. Any creature caught in the flame suffers 4D6 fire damage, though on a successful Dodge roll a character may dive for cover to halve this damage and AP counts as normal. The Dragon may only breathe flame once per hour.   Further attempts to breathe flame within this time period require the creature to make a Resilience test, with a cumulative –20% penalty for every attempt.  Resist Fire.   Dragons ignore the first 12 damage from fire.  Supernatural.   Dragons are highly magical creatures and often learn Arcane Magic and Folk Magic (of which they have a minimum of 10 points of Magnitude of spells)  Dwarf  These short, stocky and bearded, human-like creatures, live underground in vast halls,   meticulously carved out of the rock by their highly skilled   hands.   Long lived and proud of their work, Dwarfs are the natural enemies of Orcs and Goblins, who often encroach upon their realms.  Hit Points   15  Major Wound   8  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   12m  Armor   Chainmail (5AP)  Plunder Rating   3  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  4D6 (14)   2D6+12 (19)   3D6 (11)   1D6+3 (7)   2D6+6 (13)   3D6 (11)   3D6 (11)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   20%,   Persistence   40%,   Re- silience 55%  Knowledge.   Craft 70%  Practical.   Athletics 50%, Engineering 35%, Trade 60%, Mechanisms 40%  Close Combat 65%.   War Hammer (1D8), Battleaxe (1D8), Medium Shield (1D6)  Ranged Combat 45%.   Light Crossbow (1D8)  Abilities  Supernatural.   Typically supernatural abilities that are re- lated to Battle, Earth and Metals are available to Dwarves.  Thermoception.   Dwarves can see at dark as if it was day, by detecting heat and cold.  Earth Sense.   Dwarfs can automatically sense how far they are underground and whether or not the tunnels or cham- bers they are in are structurally sound.  Elemental  These are magical beings of raw elemental power that come from the Other Worlds.   They are usually called or summoned to the mundane world to do the bidding of Priests and Arcane Magic users.   Their appearance can vary. Some representative elementals can be seen below.  94   Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 97 ===

Size   SIZ   Damage   Hit Points (=SIZ) Attack (=SIZx5) Area of attack (=SIZ/5) Movement rate Dodge   Persistence   Resilience  Small   3   1D6   3   15%   1m   15m   120   30   100 Medium   9   2D6   9   45%   3m   23m   90   60   100 Large   21   3D6   21   105%   7m   30m   60   90   100 Huge   50   4D6   50   250%   16m   45m   30   120   100  Table 12.1: Elemental Attributes and Skills  Types  Undines.   Water elementals that look like a featureless humanoid made of water whose legs dissolve into a pillar then pool of water.  Type of attack:   Drown  Resistance used:   Resilience  Attribute damage:   Hit Points  Shades.   Darkness elementals that are living blobs of dark- ness.  Type of attack:   Fear  Resistance used:   Persistence  Attribute damage:   Power Points Shades attack using Fear, when they reduce their oppo- nent’s Power Point’s total to zero they literally die of shock.  Salamanders.   Fire elementals that look like lizards made of fire.  Type of attack:   Burning  Resistance used:   Resilience  Attribute damage:   Hit Points  Gnomes.   Earth elementals that look like humanoids made of rock.  Type of attack:   Crush  Resistance used:   Resilience  Attribute damage:   Hit Points  Sylphs.   Air elementals that take the form of clouds which fly.  Type of attack:   Buffet  Resistance used:   Resilience  Attribute damage:   Hit Points  Abilities  Attributes.   The only Stat that an elemental has is SIZ, all its derived attributes and skills are based on this (see ta- ble 12.1). Elementals attack by engulfing their enemies. All opponents within the area of attack are potential targets. Elementals use their Attack percentage, which is equal to their size times five, to hit the target who then resists using the resistance appropriate to the attack.  Immunities.   Diseases, Poisons and their element.  See Invisible.   Elementals have magical senses that allow them to ‘see’ invisible creatures, such as immaterial spirits. They also gain a +40% when detecting hidden characters.  Camouflage.   All elementals have the equivalent of a 80% Deception when lying next to a environment of the same element as themselves.   For example, undines are nearly  invisible when lying in a pool of water and Gnomes can curl up and blend into a surrounding rocky area.  Elf  Forest dwellers, these creatures are slender and tall, with ears that end in a point.   Haughty and proud, they do not suffer the ravages of time like other mortal races. Tightly bound to their forest realms in ways no human can understand, they often come into conflict with those who despoil their lands.  Hit Points   11  Major Wound   6  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   13  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   Leather (2AP)  Plunder Rating   1  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  2D6+3 (10)   3D6 (11)   3D6+6 (17)   2D6+3 (10)   3D6+6 (17)   2D6+6 (13)   3D6 (11)  95 Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 98 ===

Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   55%,   Persistence   55%,   Re- silience 20%  Knowledge.   Nature lore 80%  Practical.   Athletics   55%,   Deception   55%,   Percep- tion 30%, Healing 50%  Close Combat 60%.   Shortspear (1D6)  Ranged Combat 80%.   Longbow (1D10)  Abilities  Supernatural.   Typically supernatural abilities that are re- lated to Battle, Healing and Nature are available to Elves.  Night Sight.   Elves treat partial darkness as illuminated and darkness as only partial darkness.  Exceptional Archers.   Elves gain a Bonus die (+1B) when using bows.  Gargoyle  Grotesque humanoids with leathery bat-like wings, their faces   with   exaggerated   features,   and   large   fangs   that protrude   from   their   lower   jaws.   Their   skin   is   a   dull grey, meaning that they are often mistaken for statues, a fact that a predatory Gargoyle will often use to its advantage,   staying still for hours upon end,   until prey comes near.   It is rumoured that once the Gargoyles had a vast underground Empire, but now they are encoun- tered in small groups of twenty at the most.   Often they find themselves drafted into Orc war bands as flying troops.  Hit Points   14  Major Wound   7  Damage Modifier   +2D6  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   15m, 23m flying  Armor   Tough Hide (6AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  5D6+12 (29)   3D6 (11)   3D6 (11)   5D6 (17)   1D6 (4)   3D6 (11)   1D6 (4)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   25%,   Persistence   40%,   Re- silience 40%  Knowledge.   Natural lore 40%  Practical.   Athletics 40%, Deception 30%, Perception 40%  Unarmed Combat 50%.   Claw (1D6+2D6)  Abilities  Supernatural.   Gargolyes tend not to learn magic unless taught it.   If some one is stupid enough to teach them magic, it is usually very low Magnitude Folk Magic (max 3), enough to make them useful as troops, but not enough to give them the upper hand in any mutiny.  Giant  Standing at least six metres high, a Giant is a marvel to behold to the ‘little’ races that it towers over.   It is rumoured that they once had their own civilisation, one that challenged that of the Gods, and so they were cast down and scattered.   Giants are human-like and tend to take on the cultural aspects of the nearest human culture, which they often trade with. That said, many are primitive barbarians in the wilderness.   living outside and beyond human society.   Some are master stone masons so are found in the mountains where there is an abundance of  96   Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 99 ===

stone.  Hit Points   44  Major Wound   22  Damage Modifier   +5D6  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   30m  Armor   Tough Hide (3AP)  Plunder Rating   1-5  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  9D6+18 (49)   6D6+18 (39)   2D6+3 (10)   9D6+18 (49)   3D6 (11)   3D6 (11)   2D6 (7)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   10%,   Persistence   25%,   Re- silience 80%  Knowledge.   Natural lore 20%  Practical.   Athletics 50%, Perception 40%, Deception 5%  Close Combat 90%.   Huge Club (2D6+5D6)  Ranged Combat 35%.   Thrown boulder (2D6+5D6)  Unarmed Combat 75%.   Stomp (1D6+5D6)  Abilities  Supernatural.   Giants tend to learn the magic of those cul- tures nearest them. Giants who are isolated in the moun- tains learn Folk Magic, with more powerful individuals be- coming Shamans.  Other Giant Sizes.   The above Characteristics are for a giant that stands six metres tall. For every additional two metres of height, a giant rolls an additional of 3D6+6 for STR, 2D6+6 for CON and 3D6+6 for SIZ.  Goblin  Sneakier   crueller   cousins   of   the   Orcs,   goblins   are   a quarrelsome bunch of green-skinned humanoids.   They stand as tall as a human child and their smiling faces are dominated by large hooked noses and mouth full of razor-sharp teeth.   Constantly in the shadow of the larger humanoid races, often used as slaves or cannon fodder, these diminutive psychopaths take out their frustration on any other creatures unlucky enough to be outnumbered by them or in their power.  Hit Points   9  Major Wound   5  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   10  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   Leather (2AP)  Plunder Rating   1  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  2D6+3 (10)   2D6+3 (10)   5D6 (17)   2D6 (7)   3D6 (11)   2D6+3 (10)   2D6 (7)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   50%,   Persistence   20%,   Re- silience 35%  Knowledge.   Natural lore 50%  Practical.   Athletics   50%,   Perception   35%,   Decep- tion 75%, Mechanisms 50%  Close Combat 40%.   Shortspear (1D6), Small Shield (1D4)  Ranged Combat 50%.   Sling (1D6)  Abilities  Supernatural.   On their own, Goblins can sometimes learn Battle and Folk Magic disciplines (leaders and shamans).  Thermoception.   Goblins can see at night as if it was day, by seeing heat and cold.  97 Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 100 ===

Golem  These artificial anthropomorphic behemoths are created by   powerful   magic,   from   inanimate   matter   to   do   the bidding of the magician that summoned them.   Typically formed from baked clay by ancient Priests, most Golems are relics of greater times. They are tireless servants, who are commanded to their labors by sacred texts placed beneath their tongues or within cavities in their heads. They follow their commands precisely, but in most cases can only do one task at a time (such as Break Rocks, Guard Door). Most golems are stupid, senseless creatures, without   freewill,   but   resistant   to   almost   every   hazard thrown their way. Occasionally a Golem is given its liberty, but   they   still   remain   ponderous,   slow,   yet   thoughtful creatures. Other types of Golem exist, but are much rarer, animated statues of metal and stone are heard of and some magicians have used their power to give life to cadavers to make monstrous flesh golems.   The statistics are given here for the traditional Clay Golem.  Hit Points   29  Major Wound   15  Damage Modifier   +3D6  Power Points   4/11 (free willed)  Movement Rate   15m (cannot run)  Armor   Clay Body (8AP or 4AP against crushing weapons)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  6D6+18 (39)   3D6+18 (29)   2D6 (7)   3D6+18 (29)   1D6/2D6 (4/7)   1D6/3D6 (4/11)   1D6/2D6 (4/7)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   0%,   Persistence   90%,   Re- silience 100%  Knowledge.   Lore (Allocated Task) 50%  Practical.   Golems perform their one programmed skill at 100% unless they are free-willed in which case they develop skills normally. All other skills at base  Unarmed Combat 30%.   Fist (1D8+3D6)  Abilities  Magic.   Golems rarely learn magic, even when free-willed.  Special Rules.   Golem are immune to all mind affecting spells, they cannot be poisoned, they do not breathe, eat or sleep and are very, very hard to break. They rarely react to, or with, violence, unless commanded to do so.   They follow strictly the commands of either their master or the commands on their sacred texts.  Griffin  With the body of a lion and the head of an eagle and two eagle wings,   the mighty Griffin is associated with the nobility, who often hunt it for sport.   It lairs in the mountains and is often the lord of its terrain.  Hit Points   25  Major Wound   13  Damage Modifier   +2D6  Power Points   13  Movement Rate   23m, 30m when flying  Armor   Tough Hide (3AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  8D6 (28)   3D6+12 (22)   3D6+12 (22)   8D6 (28)   6 (6)   2D6+6 (13)   7 (7)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   40%,   Persistence   80%,   Re- silience 70%  98   Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 101 ===

Knowledge.   Nature Lore 60  Practical.   Athletics 80%, Deception 28%, Perception 50  Unarmed   Combat   70%.   Bite   (1D8+2D6),   Claw (1d6+2D6)  Harpy  A foul foetid creature, the harpy has the body of a human woman and the filth encrusted wings, legs and claws, of a bird.   Intimately associated with death, this creature is primarily a scavenger and can be found living in packs of four to forty.  Hit Points   9  Major Wound   5  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   15m, 30m when flying  Armor   None  Plunder Rating   3  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  3D6 (11)   3D6 (11)   5D6 (18)   2D6 (7)   3D6 (11)   3D6 (11)   1D6 (4)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   50%,   Persistence   25%,   Re- silience 60%  Knowledge.   Nature Lore 60%  Practical.   Athletics 60%, Deception 60%, Perception 75%  Ranged Combat 40%.   Stone (1D6 per 3m fallen), Drop- pings (1D10 CHA, temporary)  Unarmed Combat 75%.   Claw (1D6+disease)  Abilities  Folk Magic.   Wild Harpies tend to learn Folk Magic (Co- ordination and Mobility are particular favourites). Harpy nests who have contact with other Evil cultures tend to join Evil Religions.  Special Rules  Dropped Stones.   Harpies often fight by dropping stones on their foes. These stones are between 5 and 10 kilograms, and inflict 1D6 damage for every three metres the stone falls (to a maximum of 10D6).  Harpy Dung.   A character hit by harpy dung or wounded by a harpy’s claw is automatically exposed to a disease. If the harpy has the opportunity, it will often roll a stone in its dung before dropping it, which will also transmit a disease.   A character struck by harpy droppings gains, in addition to a disease, an overpowering stench that causes the temporary loss of 1D10 CHA. The character must bathe for one hour for every CHA point lost, to rid himself of the stink. Cloth and other porous items (leather and wood, for example) must likewise be cleansed to get rid of the smell.  Disease Immunity.   Harpies are completely immune to both magical and mundane diseases.  Merfolk  These humanoids have a human upper body, a fish body from the waist down and live in large undersea colonies which mirror the human kingdoms of dry land above. They are quite territorial and they have been known to lure sailors to their death if they did not paid them the proper respect.  Hit Points   14  Major Wound   7  99 Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 102 ===

Damage Modifier   +1D6  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   23m swimming, 7m crawling in land  Armor   None  Plunder Rating   1  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  3D6+3 (14)   3D6 (11)   2D6+6 (13)   3D6+6 (17)   3D6 (11)   3D6 (11)   3D6 (11)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   30%,   Persistence   30%,   Re- silience 30%  Knowledge.   Nature Lore 80%  Practical.   Athletics 60%, Deception 30%, Perception 50%  Close Combat 35%.   Longspear (1D8+1D6), Dagger (1D4+1+1D6)  Abilities  Magic.   Merfolk typically join the religion of the Sea God.  Long Breath.   Merfolk can hold their breath and swim underwater for their CON in minutes.  Sea Serpent  These   long   serpentine   sea   monsters   are   distantly   re- lated to Dragons. They lair in caves at the bottom of the sea and this is where they drag their victims to be devoured.  Hit Points   36  Major Wound   18  Damage Modifier   +5D6  Power Points   21  Movement Rate   23m swimming, 0m in land  Armor   Scales (5AP)  Plunder Rating   3  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  8D6+30 (58)   4D6+21 (35)   2D6 (7)   6D6+15 (36)   3 (3)   6D6 (21)   3 (3)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   40%,   Persistence   40%,   Re- silience 80%  Practical.   Athletics 60%, Stealth 25%  Unarmed Combat 60%.   Bite (1D6+5D6)  Holy Steed  The Holy Steed is typically summoned from the Other World   and   is   associated   with   a   particular   Deity   that the summoner worships.   It can have several different variations, like The Giant Eagle of the Storm Lord, The Kraken of the Sea Mistress or the Iron Horse of the Lord of War.  Hit Points   25  Major Wound   13  Damage Modifier   +2D6  Power Points   18  Movement Rate   20m  Armor   Special (6AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  30   20   18   30   18   18   18  Skills  100   Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 103 ===

Resistances.   Dodge   120%,   Persistence   120%,   Re- silience 120%  Unarmed   Combat   80%.   Fist/Kick/Strangle (1D10+2D6)  Holy Warrior  The Holy Warrior is typically summoned from the Other World   and   is   associated   with   a   particular   Deity   that the summoner worships.   It can have several different variations, like The Imperial Guardians of the Gates or the Red Demon Soldier of the Burning Hell.  Hit Points   18  Major Wound   9  Damage Modifier   +1D6  Power Points   18  Movement Rate   12m  Armor   Special (6AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  20   18   15   18   15   18   18  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   150%,   Persistence   100%,   Re- silience 120%  Practical.   Athletics 120%  Combat   150%.   Choose one mode (Close,   Unarmed, Ranged) with an appropriate weapon.  Lizardman  Lizardmen   are   bipedal   Lizards   that   walk   upright,   use tools and magic,   and would threaten mankind,   if they didn’t prefer very hot climates, such as arid deserts and steamy swamps.   They can be found in anything from small primitive groups to large civilisations which enslave humans to build their awesome monuments.  Hit Points   11  Major Wound   6  Damage Modifier   +1D4  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   Scales (2AP)  Plunder Rating   3  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  3D6+6 (17)   3D6 (11)   2D6+3 (10)   3D6 (11)   2D6+6 (13)   3D6 (11)   2D6 (7)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   45%,   Persistence   25%,   Re- silience 30%  Knowledge.   Natural lore 45%  Practical.   Athletics 45%, Deception 30%, Perception 35%  Close Combat 45%.   Battleaxe (1D8+1D4)  Ranged Combat 35%.   Sling (1D6)  Unarmed Combat 25%.   Bite (1D6+1D4)  Abilities  Supernatural.   Any discipline is available to Lizardmen.  101 Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 104 ===

Ogre  A fearsome creature towering over humans with its massive frame and coarse, warty skin.   Many ogres follow dark and hideous faiths and relish the taste of human flesh. They hunt man and other intelligent creatures with vigour. Ogres are either solitary or the leaders of great clans of other monsters where might rules.  Hit Points   18  Major Wound   9  Damage Modifier   +2D6  Power Points   10  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   Tough Skin (2AP)  Plunder Rating   1  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  3D6+12 (23)   2D6+6 (13)   3D6 (11)   3D6+12 (23)   2D6+3 (10)   2D6+3 (10)   1D6 (3)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   35%,   Persistence   45%,   Re- silience 35%  Knowledge.   Nature lore 35%  Practical.   Athletics 35%, Deception 50%, Perception 50%  Close Combat 60%.   Great Axe (2D8+2D6)  Ranged Combat 40%.   Rock (1D6)  Unarmed   Combat   60%.   Fist   (1D6+2D6),   Bite (1D8+2D6)  Abilities  Supernatural.   Any is possible as long as it is related to evil and demonic powers.  Orc  Foul green-skinned humanoids with pig-like snouts and a foul temper.   Orcs live for violence and have a society where the strong dominate the weak.   Orc clans, known as warbands, regularly war on each other and other races that they come across.  Hit Points   11  Major Wound   6  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   10  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   Leather (2AP)  Plunder Rating   2  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  4D6 (14)   3D6 (11)   4D6 (14)   2D6+3 (10)   3D6 (11)   2D6+3 (10)   2D6 (7)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   35%,   Persistence   35%,   Re- silience 35%  Knowledge.   Craft 40%  Practical.   Athletics 35%, Deception 45%, Perception 45%  Close Combat 40%.   Scimitar (1D8), Medium Shield (1D6)  Ranged Combat 50%.   Shortbow (1D8)  Abilities  Supernatural.   Orcs usually worship evil or warlike deities and are members of their cults.   Exceptional leaders and shamans might be trained in Battle and Folk Magic disci- plines respectively.  102   Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 105 ===

Pixie  Diminutive humanoids with butterfly wings,   these mis- chievous beings live close to nature in forests and woods. They are quite friendly with elves, and other races quite often mistake them as a subspecies of elf.  Hit Points   8  Major Wound   4  Damage Modifier   -1D6  Power Points   13  Movement Rate   15m, 30m when flying  Armor   None  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  2D3 (4)   3D6 (11)   4D6 (14)   1D6 (4)   3D6 (11)   2D6+6 (13)   3D6 (11)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   60%,   Persistence   60%,   Re- silience 20%  Knowledge.   Nature lore 80%  Practical.   Athletics 60%, Deception 60%, Perception 60%  Close Combat 10%.   Dagger (1D4+1-1D6)  Ranged Combat 25%.   Sling (1D6)  Abilities  Supernatural.   Pixies have several supernatural abilities and almost always magic abilities.  Troll  Standing over two metres tall,   the troll is a fearsome humanoid monster with grey-green slimy skin. Its bulging  bloodshot eyes, clawed hands and a stooped posture fin- ishes off the grim countenance of this terrifying creature. Its appearance is not only the reason for its evil reputation. The troll has the ability to literally regrow severed limbs, bashed bones and to mend slashed skin, before the eyes of its attackers.   Fortunately such creatures are solitary, unless enslaved by other evil humanoids, and of incredibly low intelligence.  Hit Points   23  Major Wound   12  Damage Modifier   +2D6  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   23m  Armor   Tough hide (3AP)  Plunder Rating   1  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  4D6+12 (26)   3D6+9 (20)   2D6 (7)   4D6+12 (26)   1D6+3 (6)   3D6 (11)   2D6 (7)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   25%,   Persistence   25%,   Re- silience 60%  Knowledge.   Nature lore 40%  Practical.   Athletics 20%, Deception 20%, Perception 20%  Close Combat 40%.   Club (1D6+2D6)  Unarmed Combat 40%.   Claw (1D6+2D6)  Abilities  Regeneration.   Trolls regenerate damage done to them quite quickly, healing 1D6 Hit Points per Combat Round. This regeneration will not work on damage caused by fire.  Thermoception.   Trolls can see at night as if it was day, by seeing heat and cold.  103 Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 106 ===

Werewolf  Human by day, when the rage takes them, or under a full moon, they transform into a giant savage wolf.   The very embodiment of nature or the bane of mankind, depending on your viewpoint.  Hit Points   12  Major Wound   6  Damage Modifier   +1D6 (wolf)  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   15m (man), 30m (wolf)  Armor   Hide (1AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  3D6/6D6 (11/22)   3D6 (11)   3D6 (11)   2D6+6 (13)   2D6+6/1D6+3 (13/6)   3D6 (11)   3D6 (11)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   60%,   Persistence   60%,   Re- silience 60%  Knowledge.   Nature lore 80%  Practical.   Athletics 60%, Deception 60%, Perception 60%  Human Close Combat 35%.   Arming Sword (1D8)  Human Ranged Combat 25%.   Shortbow (1D8)  Wolf Unarmed Combat 60%.   Bite (1D8+1D6), Claw (1D6+1D6)  Abilities  Magic.   Werewolves either learn Folk Magic handed down from their ancestors and family, a grouping known as the pack, or join Earth religions of a particularly rough and savage nature.  Night Vision.   Werewolves have night vision, and at night they can see as well as they can during the day.  Shapeshift.   Werewolves can change form at will, an act that requires two Combat Actions to complete. On nights of a full moon, werewolves have no choice but to assume beast form.  Wolf Immunities and Weaknesses.   While in wolf form, werewolves are immune to most damage. Only magic, fire or weapons made of pure silver will harm them – all other blows simply bounce off harmlessly. If a normal sword with a Weapon Enhance 3 spell cast on it is used against a werewolf, only the three points of damage from the spell will affect the creature; the weapon’s normal damage, as well as the attacker’s Damage Modifier, do not count. The werewolf’s thick skin, which grants the beast one point of armour, would reduce the Weapon Enhance spell’s damage to two.   If the entire weapon is enchanted, such as with a Fire Weapon spell, the entire damage rolled will count, though the wielder’s Damage Modifier will still be ignored. Werewolves can be poisoned, so long as the poison can be introduced to the creature’s body.   They are living enti- ties who require oxygen, and thus may be asphyxiated or drowned.  Wyvern  These giant slender green reptiles are akin to dragons but with no forelegs and animal intelligence.  Hit Points   23  Major Wound   12  Damage Modifier   +2D6  Power Points   10  Movement Rate   23m, 30m when flying  Armor   Scales (5AP)  Plunder Rating   1  104   Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 107 ===

STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  4D6+12 (26)   2D6+12 (19)   2D6+6 (13)   4D6+12 (26)   7 (7)   3D6 (11)   6 (6)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   50%,   Persistence   35%,   Re- silience 50%  Practical.   Athletics 50%, Deception 10%, Perception 60%  Unarmed   Combat   60%.   Bite   (1D10+2D6),   Sting (1D6+2D6+poison), Claw (1D6+2D6)  Abilities  Multiple Attacks.   In one combat round the Wyvern can use all three attacks.  Wyvern Sting Poison.  Type: Ingested Delay: 1D2 Combat Rounds Potency: 60 Full Effect: 1D6 damage and -4 penalty to CON Duration: 6D10 minutes  12.3 Nymphs  Nymphs are spirits embodying a particular place or nat- ural feature. They take the form of humanoid women, though the precise details and powers vary according to the type of nymph. Killing a nymph’s physical body sends her to the Spirit World.   The nymph, if unmolested in the Spirit World, will form a new body in her special place after 2D6 days, provided it remains intact.  Dryad  A dryad is a nymph of a particular area of woodland, a grove of a radius in metres equal to twice her Power score. She cannot leave this territory.; if she tries to do so, her physical body disintegrates into leaves and flowers. Within a dryad’s grove is a particular tree she is mystically linked to; she will endure for as long as her personal tree endures, and no longer. A dryad can form or dissolve her body by stepping out of or into this tree, though if a dryad’s body is destroyed, it takes her time (as for any nymph) to form another.  Hit Points   11  Major Wound   6  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   22  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   None  Plunder Rating   1  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  2D6 (7)   3D6 (11)   4D6 (14)   2D6+3 (10)   3D6+6 (17)   2D6+15 (22)   2D6+12 (19)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   50%,   Persistence   60%,   Re- silience 40%  Knowledge.   Nature Lore 60%  Practical.   Deception   50%,   Perception   50%,   Perfor- mance 50%  Close Combat 40%.   Quarterstaff (1D8)  Abilities  Folk Magic 60%.   A dryad has 8 points of Folk Magic from the following spells: Befuddle, Clear Path, Countermagic, Darkwall, Detect Magic, Enhance Performance, Enhance Deception, Light.  Divine Magic.   Some dryads learn Divine Magic. Such a dryad has a Religion skill of 50%, and can spend some of the above points on divine spells.  One with the Grove.   A dryad controls all of the plants within her grove. She can cause them to move slowly, grow surprisingly rapidly, or blossom or bear fruit out of season. This power cannot be used as a direct attack, however.  105 Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 108 ===

Hag  Hags embody darkness and shadows. Hags are associated with caves and other dark areas seldom exposed to direct sunlight. A Hag can only leave her domain when it is night, and must return there before dawn;   if she does not, her physical body is destroyed.   A hag’s body is also destroyed if she is struck by direct sunlight. A hag may form and dissolve her body at will, although if her body is destroyed it takes a Hag time (as for any nymph) to form another.  Hit Points   11  Major Wound   6  Damage Modifier   +1D6  Power Points   22  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   None  Plunder Rating   3  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  6D6 (21)   3D6 (11)   3D6 (11)   3D6 (11)   2D6+12 (19)   2D6+21 (28)   1D6 (3)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   50%,   Persistence   60%,   Re- silience 40%  Knowledge.   Lore (Magic) 40%, Lore (Undead) 40%, Na- ture Lore 40%  Practical.   Deception 110%, Perception 50%  Close Combat 55%.   Claw (2D6)  Abilities  Folk Magic 75%.   A hag has 12 points of magic from the following spells: Befuddle, Countermagic, Darkwall, Detect Magic, Disruption, Enhance Deception, Extinguish, Hinder  Perception, Vomit.  Arcane Magic.   Some hags learn Arcane Magic.   They have an Arcane Magic skill of 60%, and spend some of the above points on Arcane Magic spells, usually spells involving darkness, shadows, and death.  Create Shade.   A hag can create a shade out of the dark- ness of her lair. Doing this costs 1 Power Point per point of SIZ the shade has. A hag can only manifest one shade at a time, though if it is destroyed she can create another.  Naiad  Naiads are nymphs of the water,   whether a particular stream, stretch of river, lake, swamp, or occasionally a part of the coastline. For every ten metres a naiad moves from her body of water, she loses a Power Point.   If she reaches zero Power Points, her body collapses into a pool of water, and her spirit returns to her domain.   A naiad can only regain Power Points when completely submerged in water.  Hit Points   10  Major Wound   5  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   25  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   None  Plunder Rating   1  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  4D6 (14)   3D6 (11)   4D6 (14)   2D6+3 (10)   3D6+6 (17)   2D6+18 (25)   2D6+12 (19)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   80%,   Persistence   70%,   Re- silience 60%  106   Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 109 ===

Knowledge.   Nature Lore 40%  Practical.   Perception   40%,   Performance   40%, Stealth 65%  Close Combat 40%.   Shortspear (1D6)  Ranged Combat 40%.   Javelin (1D6)  Abilities  Folk Magic 60%.   A naiad has 10 points of magic from the following spells:   Befuddle, Countermagic, Dull Weapon, Detect Magic,   Enhance Performance,   Extinguish,   Heal, Protection, Slow, Water Breath.  Divine Magic.   Some naiads learn Divine Magic. Such a naiad has a Religion skill of 50%, and can spend some of the above points on divine spells.  Undine Transformation.   A naiad can transform herself into an undine.   Doing this takes a round, and costs 1 Power Point per point of SIZ the undine has. If the undine is destroyed, the naiad is unharmed, but is immediately forced back to her own body of water.  Oread  An oread is a nymph associated with a particular hill, mountain, or valley. For every ten metres an oread moves from her domain, she loses a Power Point. If she reaches zero Power Points, her body turns to stone, and her spirit returns home.  Hit Points   11  Major Wound   6  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   25  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   None  Plunder Rating   1  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  2D6 (7)   3D6+3 (12)   3D6+6 (17)   2D6+3 (10)   3D6+3 (14)   2D6+15 (22)   2D6+9 (15)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   40%,   Persistence   30%,   Re- silience 50%  Knowledge.   Nature Lore 40%  Practical.   Perception 50%, Performance 50%, Decep- tion 80%  Unarmed Combat 35%.   Fist (1D6)  Ranged Combat 40%.   Rock (1D4)  Abilities  Folk   Magic   70%.   An oread has 12 points of magic from the following spells:   Countermagic, Darkwall, Dull Weapon, Detect Magic, Extinguish, Pierce, Protection, Re- pair, Slow, Vigour, Weapon Enhance.  Divine Magic.   Some oreads learn Divine Magic. Such an oread has a Religion skill of 50%, and can spend some of the above points on divine spells.  Gnome Transformation.   An oread can transform herself into a gnome. Doing this takes a round, and costs 1 Power Point per point of SIZ the gnome has. If the gnome is destroyed, the oread is unharmed, but is immediately forced back to her own domain.  107 Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 110 ===

12.4 Spirits  Ancestor Spirit  An Ancestor Spirit is the deceased relative of a living being.   They are the keepers of tribal wisdom, ancient advisors or just long lost loved ones. They appear as they did in life, dressed in tattered clothing of familiar designs. Ancestor Spirits often manifest at large gatherings of their kinsmen, at holy rituals or to bring portents of warning and doom to their kin. Some clans bind their ancestors to holy locations, while other see that as disrespectful.  Hit Points   0  Major Wound   0  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   17  Movement Rate   30m  Armor   0  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  -   -   -   -   3D6 (11)   3D6+6 (17)   3D6 (11)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   40%,   Persistence   50%,   Re- silience N/A  Knowledge.   Lore (Spirit World) 40%  Spirit Combat 40%.   Spectral Blast (1D6)  Other  Special Rules.   All Ancestor Spirits are capable of covertly possessing their relatives to aid them. All Ancestors know 1D6 X 10% Skills and have 1D4 points of Folk Magic spells (they may rarely have Arcane or Divine Magic). When they possess their relatives, the Ancestor gives them access to their magic which is cast at POWx4.   The skills of the ancestor are added as a bonus to those possessed for the duration of the possession.   The skills can be selected at random, but most will have skills logical to the spirits back- ground, the maximum amount of points allocated to one skill is 30%. Some examples follow.  Uncle Mad Blood the Pirate Captain.  INT 9 - POW 15 - CHA 10 Skills: Close Combat 20%, Sailing 20% Spells: Weapon Enhance 4  Granny Goodweather.  INT 17 - POW 20 - CHA 18 Skills: Healing 20%, Influence 30%, Natural World 10% Spells: Heal 4  Disease Spirit  Disease spirits are the source of misery and illness.   They appear in a sickly green humanoid form, with a skull or sunken plaid face for a head. They are commonly encoun- tered in wilderness areas, where there are no Shamans to banish them, and around evil monster groups where evil Shamans’ bind them to protect their treasure and lair.  Hit Points   0  Major Wound   0  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   17  Movement Rate   30m  Armor   0  108   Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 111 ===

Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  -   -   -   -   2D6 (7)   3D6+6 (17)   3D6 (11)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   40%,   Persistence   50%,   Re- silience N/A  Knowledge.   Lore   (Disease)   100%,   Lore   (Spirit World) 40%  Practical.   Deception 30%  Spirit Combat 50%.   Spectral Claw (1D6)  Special Rules.   A disease spirit is in essence a disease, either mundane or magical.   After covertly possessing its victim, the possessed will be forced to make Resilience tests to resist the effects of the disease (see page 81). However, the disease cannot be thrown off until the disease spirit is ousted. Also, the spirit will nearly always choose to apply its POW as a penalty to the possessed’s Resilience tests. If the possessed dies while being possessed by a disease spirit, there is a percentage chance equal to the spirit’s POW that it will arise as a new disease spirit in 2D6 hours.  Ghost  Those that have passed beyond the veil, but not found peace, remain to haunt the living as ghosts.   Jealous and mean they seek to do harm to the living and often will try to possess a victim, to experience the joys of living once again.  Hit Points   0  Major Wound   0  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   23m  Armor   None  Plunder Rating   0-5  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  -   -   -   -   3D6 (11)   3D6 (11)   3D6 (11)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   40%,   Persistence   50%,   Re- silience N/A  Knowledge.   Lore (Spirit World) 30%  Practical.   Deception 50%, Perception 40%  Spirit Combat 40%.   Dominant Possession (1D6)  Abilities  Magic.   As in life.  Other.   Ghosts can only be affected by magic spells which either dominate or drive them off, or by characters who can engage in Spirit Combat.  Guardian Spirit  These spirits are often found guarding treasures, tombs and temples. They are unusual in that they are bound to a location or object, but remain discorporate.   They take many forms, such as leonine monster guard dogs, shadowy robed figures or pale warriors.   The Guardian Spirit has conditions set upon it as part of its binding determining how it will defend its post.   When these conditions are broken   the   spirit   lets   out   a   screaming   howl   and   then attacks in Spirit Combat. The warning howl can be heard at a distance of 10m per point of the Guardian’s POW. A Guardian cannot roam from its post a distance greater than its POW in meters.  109 Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 112 ===

Hit Points   0  Major Wound   0  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   17  Movement Rate   30m  Armor   0  Plunder Rating   (depends on the Treasure being guarded)  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  -   -   -   -   2D6 (7)   3D6+6 (17)   3D6 (11)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   40%,   Persistence   60%,   Re- silience N/A  Knowledge.   Lore (Spirit World) 40%  Spirit Combat 70%.   Spectral Claw (1D6)  Healing Spirit  The nemesis of the disease spirit this spirit appears as a bright happily glowing orb.   They are typically summoned to help heal the sick and wounded.  Hit Points   0  Major Wound   0  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   14  Movement Rate   30m  Armor   0  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  -   -   -   -   2D6 (7)   4D6 (14)   3D6 (11)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   40%,   Persistence   50%,   Re- silience N/A  Knowledge.   Lore   (Disease)   100%,   Lore   (Spirit World) 60%  Spirit Combat 50%.   Spectral Blast (1D6)  Folk Magic 100%.   Heal 6  Special Rules.   The natural enemy of a disease spirit, a healing spirit is only capable of entering Spirit Combat with a disease spirit already covertly possessing a creature.   If the healing spirit can bring the disease spirit to zero Power Points, it will force it to leave its host. The healing spirit will then depart as well, for it cannot permanently possess any creature. If a healing spirit is used on an individual who is sick from a mundane illness (rather than from a disease spirit), it will add its POW as a percentage bonus to the individual’s chance of success on his next Resilience test to throw off the effects of the disease.  Magic Spirit  Magic spirits are spirits that have mastery of one or more spells.   If bound, the holder of the spirit may use the spirit’s Power Points for casting spells. Magic spirits may not initiate Spirit Combat, but may use the spells it knows to attack or defend itself.   They appear as a series of multi-coloured orbs equal in number to the number of spells they know.  Hit Points   0  Major Wound   0  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   14  Movement Rate   30m  110   Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 113 ===

Armor   0  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  -   -   -   -   3D6 (11)   4D6 (14)   1D6 (4)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   40%,   Persistence   50%,   Re- silience N/A  Knowledge.   Lore (Spirit World) 60%  Spirit Combat 50%.   Spectral Blast (1D6)  Magic.   A magic spirit knows 1D6 Folk Magic, Divine Magic or Arcane Magic spells. These spirits will only know one spell type – for example, a magic spirit will not have both Divine and Arcane spells, nor may it ever learn spells of another type.   If the spirit casts Divine Magic, it must regain the use of spent spells in the same way a Priest does. If casting Arcane Magic or Folk Magic it has a casting skill equal to its POW x 5.  Passion Spirit  This group of spirits embody negative and harmful feelings and emotions. If they successfully defeat a living creature in Spirit Combat, they will covertly possess that creature. The results of this possession depend upon the particular passion spirit. They are normally invisible, but fear spirits appear as an inky black form with a skull head, madness spirits are ghost like with faces quickly changing from one expression to another while pain spirits take on an angry red form with a face twisted in agony.  Hit Points   0  Major Wound   0  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   17  Movement Rate   30m  Armor   0  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  -   -   -   -   2D6+3 (10)   3D6+6 (17)   4D6 (14)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   40%,   Persistence   50%,   Re- silience N/A  Knowledge.   Lore (Spirit World) 60%  Spirit Combat 55%.   Spectral Claw (1D6)  Other  Fear Spirit.   If a fear spirit covertly possesses a host, the host becomes permanently Demoralised (as the Folk Magic spell), until the spirit is cast out.  Madness Spirit.   If a madness spirit succeeds in covertly possessing a victim, it will manifest itself in daily bouts of insanity.   At least once per day, the madness spirit will attempt to cause an insane fit in its host.   It matches its Persistence against the host’s Resilience in a standard op- posed test.   If the host succeeds, the madness spirit will be quiescent for at least a number of hours equal to the host’s POW. If the host fails, he becomes incapacitated for 1D20 hours – screaming madly, giggling incoherently or simply becoming catatonic for the duration of the ef- fect. The madness spirit chooses the manner of madness, though most are partial to a single effect.   The madness spirit will also attempt to assert itself whenever its host is in a stressful situation. Combat is an obvious example, but these spirits also delight in affecting their hosts in a variety of other stressful, important situations – collapsing into a fit of mad giggling while petitioning an unfriendly king for a boon is exactly the kind of thing madness spirits enjoy. Note that if the stressful situation occurs during a period of forced quiescence on the part of the spirit, it will be unable to manifest itself.  Pain Spirit.   If a pain spirit manages to covertly possess its target, the victim will be overcome with a sudden burst of pain.   From that point on, until the spirit is cast out, the victim will always be conscious of a dull ache in his joints or a twinge in his muscles. Whenever the host acts quickly (as in combat) or concentrates (as in spell casting), and sometimes purely at random intervals, he is struck by a sudden spasm of pain.   This pain reduces all the host’s skill tests by a penalty equal to the spirit’s POW.  111 Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 114 ===

12.5 Undead  Ghoul  Amongst the foulest of the undead,   Ghouls survive by eating   the   flesh   of   the   living   in   a   state   of   perpetual ravenous hunger.   Most Ghouls haunt their old tombs in packs waiting for the living to foolishly enter their lairs.   Those Ghouls who are more capable and magically powerful enslave weaker living races,   such as orcs and goblins, using these creatures to capture their prey for them.   Unlike other undead, the ghoul’s flesh has a tight leathery sheen as if it has been tanned at the time of death or transformation.   Their eyes are alive and bright and their teeth are sharp and needle-like.  Hit Points   12  Major Wound   6  Damage Modifier   +1D4  Power Points   11  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   None  Plunder Rating   1  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  4D6 (14)   3D6 (11)   3D6 (11)   2D6+6 (13)   3D6 (11)   3D6 (11)   1D6 (4)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   40%,   Persistence   30%,   Re- silience 40%  Knowledge.   Lore (Undead) 75%  Practical.   Athletics 40%, Deception 60%, Perception 30%  Unarmed   Combat   60%.   Claw   (1D4+1D4),   Bite (1D6+1D4+poison)  Abilities  Magic.   Ghouls learn Folk Magic from each other, with the occasional powerful leader becoming a Shaman or Priest of some Evil Cannibal religion.  Ghoul Howl.   Ghouls can employ a blood chilling howl once per combat round in addition to a Claw or Bite at- tack. When a ghoul howls, every creature in a radius equal to the ghoul’s POW in metres becomes Demoralised (as the Folk Magic spell), unless he can overcome the ghoul’s Persistence with his Resilience in an opposed test.   The Demoralise effect continues until all howling stops.   Any who are able to resist the howling must resist again ev- ery round for a total of five successive rounds, after which they are considered immune to the howling’s effects for a week. Countermagic, Shield and Spell Resistance offer no protection against the effects of a ghoul’s howl.  Ghoul Venom.  Type: Ingested or smeared Delay: 1D3 Combat Rounds Potency: 22 Full Effect: Paralysis Duration: 1D10 hours or until healing is administered that restores at least 1 Hit Point.  Mummy  The preserved remains of nobility,   whose death rituals are deliberately designed to turn them into this form of undead.   Often bandaged from head to toe as part of this process, they tend to be found in their original tomb. Being nobility, they are of course found as the leader of other lesser undead types, who were often their servants during life as well.  Hit Points   18  112   Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 115 ===

Major Wound   9  Damage Modifier   +1D6  Power Points   0  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   Tough Skin (2AP)  Plunder Rating   4  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  3D6+12 (23)   3D6+12 (23)   2D6 (4)   2D6+6 (13)   2D6+6 (13)   0 (0)   1 (1)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   30%,   Persistence   80%,   Re- silience 50%  Knowledge.   Lore (Undead) 65%  Practical.   Athletics 10%, Deception 10%, Perception 40%  Close Combat 80%.   Great Hammer (2D8+1D6)  Unarmed Combat 60%.   Fist (1D6+1D6)  Abilities  Magic.   Since Mummies are POW-less, they never have Folk Magic. Mummies who were Priests in their previous lives may have Divine Magic, and Mummies who know Ar- cane Magic will always know at least one Tap spell to gain Power Points to fuel their spells.  Special Rules  Immunities.   Mummies are immune to Mind control, nat- ural diseases and poisons.  Flammable.   An Ignite spell will work on a mummy’s body. A strike with a fiery weapon, such as a sword with a Fire Weapon spell on it, or even a torch, will ignite the mummy if the hit causes damage. The damage done by the initial hit is taken each combat round as fire damage, unless the fire is put out.   To put out a fire the Mummy must take 1 combat round to roll on the ground or immerse itself in water. During this time it may not make any other actions or reactions.  Cannot Heal.   Healing spells are ineffective on Mummies, though a Repair spell will fix any damage done (in 1D10 Hit Point increments).  Any Creature.   When a creature becomes a mummy, its STR and CON are doubled. The statistics above represent a human mummy, though any sentient creature willing to undergo the process may become a mummy.  Skeleton  The animated bones of a human, these are the products of supernatural forces.   Skeletons are the lowest type of undead which are often created to and act as disposable warriors and tomb guards.  Hit Points   8  Major Wound   4  Damage Modifier   0  Power Points   0  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   Leather (2AP)  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  2D6+6 (13)   1D6 (4)   3D6 (11)   3D6 (11)   0 (0)   0 (0)   0 (0)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   10%,   Persistence   100%,   Re- silience 100%  Close   Combat   35%.   Arming Sword (1D8),   Medium Shield (1D6)  Abilities  Pierce Resistance.   Skeletons take only half damage from piercing weapons.  Immunities.   Skeletons are immune to all diseases, poisons and mind control supernatural abilities.  113 Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 116 ===

Vampire  Dark overlords of the undead, Vampires feed off the blood and life-force of the living. They appear as normal humans, but their pallid complexion and overly large canines give them away.   Vampires are either solitary hunters, or form societies where weaker members of the brood must bring victims to the more powerful leaders.  Hit Points   18  Major Wound   9  Damage Modifier   +1D6  Power Points   0 (see below)  Movement Rate   15m  Armor   Chainmail (5AP) or Platemail (6AP) for High Vam- pires  Plunder Rating   4  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  3D6+12 (23)   3D6+12 (23)   3D6 (11)   2D6+6 (13)   2D6+6 (13)   0 (0)   3D6 (11)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   40%,   Persistence   80%,   Re- silience 80%  Knowledge.   Culture (Local) 80%  Practical.   Athletics 50%, Deception 80%, Perception 80%  Close Combat 50%.   Arming Sword (1D8+1D6), Medium Shield (1D6+1D6)  Unarmed Combat 60%.   Bite (1D6 + Power Point drain)  Abilities  Magic.   Vampires are highly magical and will either be a Priest of an appropriate Death Religion or an Arcane Magic caster. They have at least 10 points of Magnitude of spells.  Life Energy Vision.   Vampires can see in the dark and at night as if it was day by sensing life energy.  Power Point drain.   A vampire does not regenerate Hit Points or Power Points normally.   Instead, he must take them from other beings by draining their blood. On a suc- cessful bite attack, the vampire will hang on and drain D6 Power Points from the victim every round.   Each drained Power Point gives the vampire one Hit Point or Power Point (vampire’s choice). When the Vampire drains the victim’s Power Points to 0, the victim fails unconscious, as normal, and the vampire can choose to carry on draining blood, ex- cept now it’s the victim’s permanent POW that is drained.  Shapeshifting.   Vampires have the ability to shapeshift into mist at will. As a single Combat Action, the vampire (and every non-living item on his person) dissolves into a thin, greenish fog approximately the same SIZ as he was in the flesh. As a mist, the vampire is immune to all types of physical damage, but cannot take any action except Move- ment Rate.   In mist form, a vampire moves at the same speed as he would normally and is unaffected by strong winds. Additionally, vampires still take damage from sun- light, as normal.   As well as the ability to transform into mist, some vampires manifest the ability to shapeshift into wolves and bats as well. As with the mist transformation, such changes take a Combat Action to perform.   Upon death, the vampire collapses to the ground and turns to mist at the beginning of the next Combat Round. Before then, it can be destroyed permanently by driving a stake through its heart (the only way to prevent it turning to mist) and decapitating it.  Sunlight Weakness.   As creatures of the night Vampires cannot stand the touch of natural sunlight. They take two point of damage per round that they are exposed to the sun, though some will risk travelling in the daylight hours by wearing layers of clothing and a hood to cover as much of their body as possible.  Holy Symbols.   In the past the holy icons of some reli- gions have proved effective against vampires.   Those that focus their energies against the undead are the most likely to be effective. But it is down to the Gamemaster to decide what supernaturally offends any particular vampire.   An el- ven vampire, for example, might be repelled by symbols of nature gods, rather than by human symbols of holiness. Any character presenting a holy symbol to a vampire as a Combat Action matches their Persistence against the vam- pire’s Resilience in an opposed check.   They will receive bonuses or penalties at the Gamemaster’s discretion, based on the appropriateness of the symbol being displayed. On a successful test, the vampire loses 1D4 Hit Points (unaf- fected by armour or any of the vampire’s magic) and may not attack that character or any other character under the protection of Holy Symbol.  114   Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 117 ===

Zombie  The restless dead, rotting corpses animated by dark magic that shamble the world serving their masters or wandering lost, randomly attacking the living.  Hit Points   7  Major Wound   4  Damage Modifier   +1D6  Power Points   0  Movement Rate   7m  Armor   None  Plunder Rating   0  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  3D6+12 (23)   1D6 (4)   1D6+3 (7)   3D6 (10)   1D3 (2)   0 (0)   1D3 (2)  Skills  Resistances.   Dodge   0%,   Persistence   100%,   Re- silience 100%  Unarmed Combat 50%.   Fist (1D3+1D6)  Abilities  Immunities.   Zombies are immune to fatigue, disease, poi- sons and mind control.  115 Chapter 12.   Creatures

=== PAGE 118 ===

APPENDIX A  OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a  The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast Inc.   and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc (‘Wizards’).   All Rights Reserved. 1.   Definitions:   (a)”Contributors” means the copyright and/or trade- mark owners who have contributed Open Game Content; (b)”Derivative Material” means copyrighted material including derivative works and translations (including into other computer languages), potation, mod- ification, correction, addition, extension, upgrade, improvement, com- pilation, abridgment or other form in which an existing work may be recast, transformed or adapted; (c) “Distribute” means to reproduce, license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or other- wise distribute; (d)”Open Game Content” means the game mechanic and includes the methods, procedures, processes and routines to the extent such content does not embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement over the prior art and any additional content clearly iden- tified as Open Game Content by the Contributor, and means any work covered by this License, including translations and derivative works under copyright law, but specifically excludes Product Identity.   (e) “Product Identity” means product and product line names, logos and identifying marks including trade dress;   artifacts;   creatures charac- ters; stories, storylines, plots, thematic elements, dialogue, incidents, language, artwork, symbols, designs, depictions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes and graphic, photographic and other visual or audio representations; names and descriptions of characters, spells, enchantments, personalities, teams, personas, likenesses and special abilities; places, locations, environments, creatures, equipment, magi- cal or supernatural abilities or effects, logos, symbols, or graphic de- signs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly iden- tified as Product identity by the owner of the Product Identity, and which specifically excludes the Open Game Content; (f) “Trademark” means the logos, names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used by a Contributor to identify itself or its products or the associated prod- ucts contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) “Use”, “Used” or “Using” means to use, Distribute, copy, edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open Game Content.   (h) “You” or “Your” means the licensee in terms of this agreement. 2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that contains a notice indicating that the Open Game Content may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must affix such a notice to any Open Game Content that you Use.   No terms may be added to or subtracted from this License except as described by the License itself. No other terms or conditions may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed using this License. 3.   Offer and Acceptance:   By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms of this License. 4. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual, worldwide, royalty- free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this License to Use, the Open Game Content. 5. Representation of Authority to Contribute: If You are contributing original material as Open Game Content, You represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufficient rights to grant the rights conveyed by this License. 6.   Notice of License Copyright:   You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to include the exact text of the COPY- RIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modi- fying or distributing, and You must add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder’s name to the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any original Open Game Content you Distribute. 7.   Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Iden- tity, including as an indication as to compatibility, except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of each element of that Product Identity. You agree not to indicate compati- bility or co-adaptability with any Trademark or Registered Trademark in conjunction with a work containing Open Game Content except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of such Trademark or Registered Trademark.   The use of any Prod- uct Identity in Open Game Content does not constitute a challenge to the ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any Product Identity used in Open Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity. 8.   Identification:   If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of the work that you are distributing are Open Game Content. 9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this License. You may use any authorized version of this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content originally distributed under any version of this License. 10.   Copy of this License:   You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game Content You Distribute. 11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the name of any Contributor unless You have written permission from the Contributor to do so. 12.   Inability to Comply:   If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License with respect to some or all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation then You may not Use any Open Game Material so affected. 13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein and fail to cure such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All sublicenses shall survive the termination of this License. 14.   Reformation:   If any provision of this License is held to be unen- forceable, such provision shall be reformed only to the extent necessary to make it enforceable. 15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE Open Game License v 1.0a Copyright 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc. Modern System Reference Document Copyright 2002, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.; Authors Bill Slavicsek, Jeff Grubb, Rich Redman, Charles Ryan, based on material by Jonathan Tweet, Monte Cook, Skip Williams, Richard Baker, Peter Adkison, Bruce R. Cordell, John Tynes, Andy Collins and JD Wiker. System Reference Document Copyright 2000-2003, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.; Authors Jonathan Tweet, Monte Cook, Skip Williams, Rich Baker, Andy Collins, David Noonan, Rich Redman, Bruce R. Cordell, based on original material by E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson. RuneQuest System Reference Document Copyright 2006, Mongoose Publishing; Author Matthew Sprange, based on original material by Greg Stafford. RuneQuest Companion System Reference Document Copyright 2006, Mongoose Publishing;   Author Greg Lynch et al., based on original material by Greg Stafford. RuneQuest Monster System Reference Document Copyright 2006, Mon- goose Publishing; Author Greg Lynch et al., based on original material by Greg Stafford. OpenQuest Copyright 2009-2013, D101 Games; Author Newt Newport, Simon Bray, Paul Mitchner, Tom Zunder. Legend Copyright 2011, Mongoose Publishing; Author Lawrence Whitaker Pete Nash et al., based on original material by Greg Stafford. The Age of Shadow Copyright 2011; Author Kristian Richards The Age of Shadow Campaign Guide Copyright 2011; Author Kristian Richards Fantasy Crux Copyright 2024; Author Konstantinos Karasavvas  116   Appendix A.   OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a

=== PAGE 119 ===

APPENDIX B  Acknowledgements and Art  I am grateful to Stability AI for their excellent work with Stable Cascade that allowed me to make most of the art. I would also like to thank my friend John Malis that he allowed me to use some of his 3D textures as fillers throughout the book. All of the art in this book is under the Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 3.0 License (CC-NC-ND-v3). The CC-NC-ND-v3 license is available at: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/  117 Appendix B.   Acknowledgements and Art