

=== PAGE 1 ===

FANTASY CRUX  An Open D100 System created by Konstantinos Karasavvas

=== PAGE 2 ===

Contents  Part I   Base System   1  1   Characters   2 1.1   Player Characters . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2 1.2   Character Generation   . . . . . . . . . . .   2 1.3   Improving Characters   . . . . . . . . . . .   7 2   Skills   9 2.1   The Basic Skill Test   . . . . . . . . . . . .   9 2.2   Bonus/Penalty Dice   . . . . . . . . . . . .   10 2.3   Opposed Skill Tests   . . . . . . . . . . . .   12 2.4   Very High Skills   . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12 2.5   Assistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13 2.6   Skill Descriptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13 3   Equipment   17 3.1   In-game Economics . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17 3.2   The Equipment Lists . . . . . . . . . . . .   18 3.3   Close Combat Weapons   . . . . . . . . . .   18 3.4   Ranged Weapons . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18 3.5   Armour   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19 3.6   General Items . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20 3.7   Transportation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22 3.8   Food & Lodging   . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22 4   Combat   23 4.1   Combat is Tough . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23 4.2   Summary of Combat . . . . . . . . . . . .   23 4.3   Encounter Distance . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24 4.4   Combat Actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24 4.5   Movement Actions   . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29 4.6   Reactions   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29 4.7   Other Actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30 4.8   Critical Hits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30 4.9   Fumbles   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30 4.10 Damage   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30 4.11 Special Combat Rules   . . . . . . . . . . .   31  Part II   Disciplines and Powers   33  5   Disciplines   34 5.1   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   34 5.2   Power   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   34 6   Battle   35 6.1   Spot Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35 6.2   Techniques   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35 7   Folk Magic   37 7.1   Spot Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37 7.2   Spells   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38 7.3   Spirits   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   49 7.4   Creating Magic Items   . . . . . . . . . . .   50 8   Arcane Magic   51 8.1   Arcane Magic Ranks . . . . . . . . . . . .   51 8.2   Spot Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   52 8.3   Spells   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   54 8.4   Creating Magic Items   . . . . . . . . . . .   60 9   Divine Magic   61 9.1   Religions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   61 9.2   Spells   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   68  Part III   Game Master   77  10 Adventuring   78 10.1 Spot Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   78 11 Gamemaster Tools   82 11.1 Plunder Rating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   82 11.2 Ships and Sailing . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   82 11.3 Mass Combat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   84 11.4 Skill Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   84 11.5 Fantasy Races . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   85 11.6 Player Archetypes   . . . . . . . . . . . . .   86 11.7 Traits, Talents, Feats . . . . . . . . . . . .   86 11.8 Minor NPCs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   87 11.9 Epic Characters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   87 12 Creatures   88 12.1 Animals   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   89 12.2 Monsters   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   92 12.3 Nymphs   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105 12.4 Spirits   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108 12.5 Undead   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112 A   OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a   116 B   Acknowledgements and Art   117  ii   Contents

=== PAGE 3 ===

PartI Base System

=== PAGE 4 ===

CHAPTER 1  Characters  1.1 Player Characters  A Player Character (PC) is your representation in the game. Your eyes, ears, touch, feel and smell in the imag- inary world that you and your fellow players create. On one hand the character is a collection of num- bers which describe their characteristics, skills and magic spells that are written down on a character sheet.   This chapter will explain how you create these numbers, in a process known as Character Generation.   But that is only half of what a character is. The other half exists mainly in the imagination of the player, with perhaps some quick notes on the character sheet. This half is the personality of the character and other intangibles such as goals and past history. These are the things that you can’t express in cold hard num- bers, which really bring the character to life and give the player guidelines on how the character acts and thinks.  1.2 Character Generation  Fantasy Crux character generation is a multi-step pro- cess and at each step the Player makes decisions about what their character is like at the beginning of their ad- venturing career.  1.2.1   ⋆   Concept  A character concept is a one sentence summing up of what the character is all about. Example  Rurik is “A determined and foolhardy warrior seeking excitement and adventure.”  Lura is “A mysterious and elegant arcane magic user.”  Mancala is “The illegitimate son of a murdered Noble, who survives through being a rogue.”  Abnon is “A pious priest who smites evil and protects the innocent.”  Having a clear concept of what you want your char- acter to be like at the beginning of character generation guides the whole process as you make choices to generate the numbers that you will roll against during play. For example, for Rurik it states clearly that he is a warrior, therefore when choosing skills Rurik puts points into Dodge and Unarmed combat, both skills that will be highly useful when he gets into a fight, rather than any of the Lores. You are of course free to change the concept as you generate the character. Generally, as a rule, the stronger the character concept, the easier it is to create an inter- esting character. In one sentence sum up what your character is all about.   Use the guidelines above to give yourself ideas. Ask the other Players what their character concepts are to make sure the group has an interesting selection of characters. Check with your Gamemaster that your character concept fits in with the type of game that the group is going to be playing.  1.2.2   ⋆   Characteristics  These are the primary building blocks of the character. All characters and creatures have seven characteristics, which give the basic information about the character’s physical, mental and spiritual capabilities. As well as being useful indicators of how to roleplay the character (see below) they are the scores that skills are initially based upon. The characteristics are:  Strength (STR):   A character’s brute force, Strength affects the amount of damage he deals, what weapons he can wield effectively, how much he can lift and so on.  Constitution (CON):   A measure of the character’s health, Constitution affects how much damage he can sustain in combat, as well as his general resistance to disease and other illnesses.  Dexterity (DEX):   A character’s agility, co-ordination and speed of reaction, Dexterity aids him in many physical actions, including combat.  Size (SIZ):   This is an indication of the character’s mass and, like Strength and Constitution, can affect the amount of damage a character can deal and how well he can absorb damage.  Intelligence (INT):   A character’s ability to think around problems, analyse information and memorise instruc- tions. It is a very useful Characteristic for characters interested in becoming accomplished spellcasters.  2   Chapter 1.   Characters

=== PAGE 5 ===

Power (POW):   Perhaps the most abstract Charac- teristic, Power is a measure of the character’s life force and the strength of his willpower. It is the basis of all extraordinary or supernatural powers (see Disciplines and Powers in Part II).  Charisma (CHA):   This quantifies a character’s at- tractiveness and leadership qualities. Each characteristic starts with a value of 8.   You next have 30 points to distribute amongst them.   The maximum value of a characteristic during character gen- eration is 18.   You may also lower a characteristic to gain extra points.   For example, reduce STR 8 to 6 to gain 2 points, but INT and SIZ have a minimum value of 7. Other characteristics have a minimum value of 3, although this indicates that the character has a severe disadvantage in this area. This method is appropriate if you already have a clear idea of your character concept as it gives you precise con- trol on the relative strength of each characteristic. You are not at the mercy of random dice rolls (see Random Characteristics optional rule) nor do you have to negoti- ate with your Gamemaster about switching the random rolls around so that the characteristic scores match your concept. Example  Rob is playing Rurik, who is a rough and ready warrior, and spends his 30 points in the following way.  STR   CON   DEX   SIZ   INT   POW   CHA  18   12   12   16   10   8   10  He adds ten, four, and eight to STR, CON and SIZ respectively to get a higher damage modifier and hit points total and for the ‘big bruiser’ element of the character concept, and four to DEX since that im- proves when he acts in initiative and is the base for many important skills for warriors.   Finally he adds two points to both INT and CHA, to make sure Rurik is average for Intelligence and sociability. He chooses not to increase POW at character creation since he doesn’t really see Rurik as much of a magic user at the start of the game.  For any race the maximum value of any characteristic is the maximum dice roll plus three. For Humans this is 21. One feature of the points buy system is that it tends to produce characters that are close to the average score, unless you choose to reduce one of your characteristics from the initial allocation of eight or leave it unmodi- fied. By taking that approach you will have some weak characteristics, such as a DEX of 8 indicating that your character is a bit slow and clumsy, but you will also have a few strong characteristics, such as an INT of 18 which shows your character is a natural born genius. You can also end up with characters with high and low characteristics using the random method as well. Such characters may at first glance look undesirable,  on account of how base skills are affected, but actually they present good opportunities for roleplaying the flaws of the character, and actually makes the character more interesting as a result. Random Characteristics Players can also roll for characteristics.   For human characters roll 4D6 for STR, CON, DEX, POW and CHA and 3D6+6 for INT and SIZ. Discard the lowest die. You may swap one pair.  1.2.3   ⋆   Attributes  Attributes are a set of secondary scores that define the character’s potential to do and take physical damage, how quickly they move, and the amount of extraordi- nary or supernatural powers available to the charac- ter. Attributes are determined from the character’s char- acteristic scores.  Damage Modifier (DM):   The Damage Modifier ap- plies whenever the character uses a weapoin (except crossbows).   It is used to show that bigger, stronger, characters deal out more damage than smaller, weaker characters.   To work out your character’s Damage Modifier, add Strength and Size together and look at table 1.1.  Hit Points (HP):   These determine how much dam- age the character can sustain before reaching uncon- sciousness or death.   Hit Points equal Size plus Con- stitution divided by 2, rounded up.  Major Wound Level:   When the character takes this amount of damage in one go, they suffer a Major Wound. Major Wounds are injuries, such as a severed limb, broken ribcage or broken skull, which may ren- der the character unconscious immediately and leave  3 Chapter 1.   Characters

=== PAGE 6 ===

STR + SIZ   Damage Modifier  1-10   -1D6 11-15   -1D4 16-25   +0 26-30   +1D4 31-45   +1D6 46-60   +2D6 61-75   +3D6 Every additional +15   +1D6  Table 1.1: Damage Modifier table permanent affects if not healed by supernatural pow- ers. Major Wound Level is equal to Total Hit Points divided by 2, rounded up.  Power Points (PP):   These are used to activate any extraordinary or supernatural powers the character knows.   If it is reduced to zero the character drops unconscious until they regain at least one point. The character’s starting Power Points will be equal to the character’s POW.  Movement Rate:   This is the amount in metres that a character can move in a five second Combat Round. Human characters have a Movement rate of 15 metres.  Combat Order:   This is the order in which the char- acter acts during combat. To calculate Combat Order add DEX and INT and divide by 2.   Then substract your armour’s ENC from the result. Rounding Numbers in Fantasy Crux are always rounded to the nearest whole number.   Always round up from 0.5 and round down from below 0.5.   For example 4.1 becomes 4, while 5.5 becomes 6.  1.2.4   ⋆   Skills  Skills are things that the character can do. They repre- sent very specific areas of expertise and when the skill is used in play the percentage value of the skill is rolled against using a D100 to work out if a character success- fully completes a task in the game.   A roll equal to or less than the skill percentage usually indicates that the skill has been used successfully. Example  Rurik has a Dodge of 52%, which means that in com- bat he has to roll 52 or under on D100 to avoid the incoming blows of his opponent.  Table 1.2 translates the skill percentage into a real world description of the level of expertise.  Skill   Expertise   Description  0-25%   Novice   Someone with virtually no ex- perience with the skill. 26-50%   Apprentice   Someone who is learning the skill. 51-75%   Veteran   Someone who regularly uses the skill as part of their everyday life. 76-99%   Expert   A local expert with the skill, who can perform it under most conditions with ease and ele- gance. 100+   Master   The acknowledged best in that skill, and regularly performs the impossible in extremely difficult conditions.  Table 1.2: Skill and Expertise From looking at the above table you can see that Rurik with his Dodge of 52% is quite proficient, hav- ing an expertise level of Veteran, probably from being in actual combat on several occasions and learning by necessity to get out of the way of weapon attacks.  ▶   Skill Lists  The following tables lists all the skills that every charac- ter possesses and the Characteristics used to determine the skill’s base score.   The tables also give each skill a brief description of what the skill does, but a fuller de- scription is given in the Skills chapter. Skills are grouped into categories for easy reference:  Resistances   are skills that get the character out of harms way.  Combat skills   measure the characters skills in physical violence.  Knowledge skills   measure the intellectual skills of the character.  Practical skills   measure the characters’ ability of per- forming a variety of everyday and specialist tasks. Some skills like Lore (Type), Craft (Type) and Cul- ture (Other) all have a descriptor in brackets after the main skill name.   This denotes that at time of points allocation the player must decide what Type or Other is.   For example Lore (Type) could be Lore (Heraldry) or Lore (Astronomy). It’s worth putting the majority of your points into Dodge if you are going down the route of the Warrior with your character. If you are thinking more of a magic using character, Persistence is probably more appropri- ate.   Resilience is good for hardy characters that can shrug off disease and stay conscious when they take dam- age.  4   Chapter 1.   Characters

=== PAGE 7 ===

Skill   Base   Description  Dodge   DEX+10   Gets you out of the way of physical threats, such as an incoming axe or dragon breath. Persistence   POW+10   Is   a   measure   of   your character’s willpower and resistance against hostile magic and is also rolled to resist attempts to influ- ence the character against their will. Resilience   CON+POW   Is a measure of your char- acter’s   health   and   their ability to survive exposure, hunger and thirst.   It is also their chance to resist the effects of diseases.  Table 1.3: Resistances  Skill   Base   Description  Close Combat DEX+STR   A   character’s   skill   with melee   weapons,   such   as swords,   axes,   daggers, spears and shields. Ranged Combat DEX+INT   A character’s skill with mis- sile and thrown weapons. Unarmed Combat DEX+STR   A character’s skill with nat- ural weapons such as bite, fist, kick, grapple and claws.  Table 1.4: Combat Skills It goes without saying that all these skills are ap- propriate for characters who want to be warriors.   A few points however in either close or unarmed combat are useful even for non-combative characters since these skills can be used for self-defence. Knowledge skills are good for characters that are sages or scholars and who make their living from obscure information that other people do not have the time to learn.   Culture (other) and Language (other) are also useful to characters whose abilities revolve around com- munications, such as merchants and diplomats. On the face of it, it is tempting to see the Practical category as a big grab bag of miscellaneous skills. How- ever it is worth spending some points on one to three of the skills, even if you want to be a big muscled warrior. These skills allow the character to do things in game, and Athletics, Influence and Perception get called upon  Skill   Base   Description  Culture (Own)   INT+10   What   a   character knows   about   the history, politics, geog- raphy of their own land and society. Language (Own)   INT+50   How   fluent   a   charac- ter is at speaking and potentially reading and writing their own lan- guage. Natural Lore   INT+10   Predicting the weather, recognizing and caring for animals and plants, geology and survival in the natural world. Culture (Other)   INT   What   a   character knows   about   the history,   politics   and geography of a foreign land. Language (Other)   INT   How   fluent   a   charac- ter is at speaking and potentially reading and writing   a   foreign   lan- guage. Lore (Type)   INT   Other specialist knowl- edge skills, such as Lore (Herbalist), Lore (Her- aldry) not covered by the above.  Table 1.5: Knowledge Skills  5 Chapter 1.   Characters

=== PAGE 8 ===

Skill   Base   Description  Athletics   DEX+STR   This   skill   measures   the characters’s   ability   at running, lifting, jumping, swimming and climbing. Craft   INT+10   This   skill   allows   you to   make   things,   such as   pots,   weapons,   and buildings. Deception   DEX+INT   Stealth, hiding and pick- ing pockets are all han- dled by this skill. Driving   DEX+INT   This skill covers ancient- medieval period vehicles such   as   carts,   chariots and wagons. Engineering   INT+10   Large scale construction and   siege   engines   are covered by this skill. Healing   INT+10   Healing   wounds   and treating   disease   using first aid and surgery. Influence   CHA+10   This skill is used when the   character   wants   to persuade another to do something   against   their normal interests. Mechanisms   DEX+INT   Locks and anything with complex moving parts are covered by this skill. Perception   INT+POW   Used to spot hidden ob- jects and spot small de- tails   in   the   character’s environment. Performance   CHA+10   Acting,   playing   instru- ments,   dancing   and singing are all covered by this skill. Riding   DEX+POW   Used when trying tricky manoeuvres using beasts of burden, such as horses, camels and more fantas- tic   beasts   such   as   hip- pogriffs. Sailing   DEX+INT   This skill covers the use of ships and boats. Streetwise   CHA+POW   How   well   the   character operates in a city envi- ronment.   Used to find out information and nav- igate around the streets and   find   a   fence   for stolen goods are all cov- ered by this skill. Trade   INT+10   This is the skill used by merchants and traders to value and sell goods.  Table 1.6: Practical Skills reasonably frequently.   Also if your character’s concept is that of a rogue Deception, Mechanisms and Street- wise also deserve some points. If your character is some- one who makes stuff, Craft and Engineering are skills to increase.   If your character has a background of en- tertaining people Performance is a skill to pick. If your character concept is any form of merchant Trade is a must buy.  ▶   Calculate Skills  For each skill calculate the starting skill value, the base score, from the calculation provided. Then write it down on the character sheet next to the skill. During character generation the player gets a pool of points to spend on each group of skills. Distribute points between the skills, with a limit of no more than 30 to be allocated to any one skill.  Resistances   Spend 50 points between the three skills. Combat   Spend 50 points between the three skills. Knowledge   Spend 50 points between the skills. Practical   Spend 75 points between skills.  For Players that want more flexibility they can use the following rules to further customize their characters:  Reduce up to 20 Combat points to increase Knowl- edge points at a 1:2 ratio;   thus for 10 Combat points a character can get 20 additional Knowledge points; remember that no skill can be increased by more than 30 points during character creation.  Reduce up to 10 points from Resistances, Com- bat or Practical skill categories to gain extra Im- provement Points (see page 7) at a 5:1 ratio; a total of 6 IPs can be acquired this way. These IPs can only be used to get extra Disciplines/Powers and increase Characteristics. Moreover, the start- ing limit of characteristics still apply.  1.2.5   ⋆   Special Training  Player Characters are extraordinary.   On top of them being above average they may also have special train- ing. This can manifest in improved skills or characteris- tics or even focusing in specific Disciplines. A Discipline may represent training in advanced combat techniques or magic powers or anything extraordinary or supernat- ural. Each character begins play with ten Improvement Points (see page 7) that allow players to further improve in skills or even acquire new Disciplines. For choices of Disciplines and their Powers consult the chapters in Part II.  1.2.6   ⋆   Equipment  Each character typically starts off with some money and the tools of their trade. Starting cash is 4D6 x 10 in Silver Pieces. In addition each character starts out with one of the two arms and armour packages below.  6   Chapter 1.   Characters

=== PAGE 9 ===

Leather armour, ranged weapon, close combat 2H weapon and dagger.  Leather armour, shield, ranged weapon, close com- bat 1H weapon and dagger. All characters also start out with the following equip- ment: backpack, rope, two weeks worth of traveling pro- visions, flint and tinder, waterskin. Further information about equipment and game eco- nomics is given in the chapter 3. Your Gamemaster may allow you to buy additional equipment before the game starts from the character’s starting cash.  1.2.7   ⋆   Finishing Touches  By this stage all the hard decisions on making your char- acter are over.   All that remains is to note down a few numbers on the character sheet and ponder about the character’s background and motives.  ▶   Age  Human characters start out at any age between 18 and 28. To randomly determine this, roll 2D6 and add 16.  ▶   Hero Points  Every character starts with two Hero Points. Hero points are what distinguishes the player character from the nor- mal stay at home type folk. They allow the player char- acter to:  Re-roll any failed dice roll.  Downgrade a Major Wound to a normal wound. Full damage is applied to the character’s Hit Points, but do not suffer the messy effects of a major wound.  Avoid character death. If the character’s Hit Points are reduced to zero or less, instead of dying the character is merely unconscious. The character re- mains in such a state until the combat is over at which point they awaken with one Hit Point.  Any other bonus or benefit to accomplish some- thing at the Gamemaster discretion. This can in- clude editing the plot. More than one Hero Points may be used (from multiple characters if desired) and something in favour of the players will hap- pen.   The Gamemaster may allow the players to choose the plot edit. An example of an one point edit would be a guard to forget to lock the cell that the characters are imprisoned. An example of a five points edit would be a dragon to happen to attack the castle giving the opportunity to escape! Once Hero Points are spent they are gone. The Game- master awards Hero Points at the end of the game session for moments of outstanding heroic play or for significant achievements.  ▶   Background, Appearance and Personality  A background is useful not only to give the character a history before the game starts but also as a way of noting all the intangible elements of the character’s personality. Even if you don’t create a fully written up back- ground it is worth making a mental note of what the character is like as a person and roughly what their back- ground is previous to play, as well as visualizing what they actually look like.  1.3 Improving Characters  1.3.1   ⋆   Improvement Points  Through their adventures characters will earn experi- ence, awarded by the Gamemaster as a reward for cer- tain achievements. This experience, called Improvement Points, will allow characters to improve.  ▶   Improving Skills  A player can choose to spend one Improvement Point to increase one or two skills.   Select one or two skills that are below 51% to be increased and split 5% points to those skills. Skills from 51% to 99% are increased by only 3% for each IP and skills at Mastery level, i.e. 100% or more, require one IP for a 1% in a single skill. A skill cannot be raised by more than 5% per advancement but there is no upper limit to the score a skill can reach.  ▶   Improving Characteristics  A player can choose to spend five Improvement Points to increase one Characteristic by one point.   SIZ may never be increased using Improvement Points.   The maximum a human character can increase a Characteristic to is  7 Chapter 1.   Characters

=== PAGE 10 ===

21. For non-humans, the maximum for a Characteristic is equal to the maximum possible starting score for the Characteristic plus three.  ▶   Acquiring Disciplines and Powers  A player can choose to spend Improvement Points to acquire new Disciplines. Consult the appropriate Disci- pline chapter for details of how many points are required to get the Discipline as well as how much is required to get each Power within it.  1.3.2   ⋆   Practice & Research  The characters may often experience long stretches of downtime between adventures.   This is quite normal. Group members may need to heal from wounds suffered during the last adventure, the characters may engage in some activity that takes time, or life may simply return to normal until the next danger to face the player char- acters appears. During such downtime the characters may improve their characters. The players might actually request down- time between adventures to learn new skills and it is up to the Gamemaster to determine if this is appropriate. For each three month period of practice or research a character may gain 1 Improvement Point.  8   Chapter 1.   Characters

=== PAGE 11 ===

CHAPTER 2  Skills  Characters use skills to get things done in the game. When the outcome of an action is in doubt, the Game- master will ask the player to make a skill test against the relevant skill to see if his character is successful. Example  John:   Rurik comes to a large and very deep ravine. Far below he can hear water rushing along the bot- tom of the ravine, and in front of him are the re- mains of a rope bridge that has been deliberately broken.  Rob:   How far across is it?  John:   About four metres.  Rob:   Ok,   Rurik is going to take a running jump across the ravine.  John:   Give me an Athletics skill test, since that cov- ers Jumping. You do realise that if Rurik fails he’s facing a very nasty fall?  Rob:   Yeah, Rurik works that out, but decides to worry about that when and if it happens.   Rurik’s athletics is 60%. Rob rolls a D100, his red dice (tens) comes up 3 and his white dice (units) comes up 4.  Rob:   34, a success.   Rurik takes a running jump across the ravine and is now on the other side. What’s there?  This chapter describes when and how to make skill tests, how to gain Bonus or Penalty dice on your skill depending upon the conditions the test is made under, and how to judge tests where two characters are com- peting against each other. Finally, a list of skills used in the game is detailed.  2.1 The Basic Skill Test  To make a skill test the player first describes what their character is doing. Then they roll a D100 and compare this to the relevant skill’s score. If the dice roll is equal to or less than the skill’s score, the attempt is success- ful. If the total is greater than the skill’s score, then it has failed. The Gamemaster then describes the result of the character’s success or failure.   Note that a D100 is  typically rolled with 2D10s, one for the tens and one for the units (if both results are 0 than you rolled 100!). Under normal conditions a skill test is asked for when the character is placed on the spot and has to make a successful action under pressure. Example  An apprentice potter (Craft 26%) will, day in day out, produce a couple of pots of passable quality if working at his Master’s workshop. Of course, work beyond the skill of the character is still out of their reach, unless the player decides to take the chance with the dice and ask for a skill test.  If a character has lots of time, has the tools of his trade and is in a sufficiently relaxed environment and state of mind, they complete the task to the best of their ability.  9 Chapter 2.   Skills

=== PAGE 12 ===

Example  A local noble wants an artistic piece of pottery for a grand celebration he is holding later in the month. His servant comes to the potter’s workshop, looking for the Master, who is out. The apprentice sees a chance to gain a good reputation and takes the commission. Knowing that his normal work will definitely not be up to scratch, the player decides to roll the dice in the chance that he can produce something of the standard the noble expects.  2.1.1   ⋆   Critical Successes  If the dice roll on a skill test is equal or less than the tens of the skill, then a critical success is achieved. A critical success has an outcome that far exceeds the expectation of the player when the original skill test was made. It’s the best possible result based upon the player’s original statement of intent. The actual result of a critical success during a skill test is largely up to the Gamemaster. It normally achieves one of the following results:  The task is completed sooner.  The task is completed to a higher degree of exper- tise than normal.  The task is completed with élan and style, gener- ally impressing witnesses.  The character gains additional information or in- sight into the task thanks to their brilliance. Example  When Rurik is jumping the chasm, his Athletics skill is 67%   and therefore his chance of getting a critical is 6. Rob rolls a 4, which is less than the 6% target for a critical success.   As a result, the Gamemaster rules that Rurik easily jumps the chasm with grace that allows him to carry on running without having to pause to catch his breath.  2.1.2   ⋆   Fumbles  Whenever a skill test results in a roll of 99 or 00, i.e. the two D10s both come up 0, then the player has fumbled. If the player’s skill is greater than 100% then a fumble occurs only with 00. A fumble is the worst imaginable outcome of the skill test based upon the player’s original description of what their character was planning to do when the skill test was called for. The actual result of a fumble is largely up to the Gamemaster to decide. It normally results in one of the following mishaps:  The task takes twice as long to finish and is still a failure.  The task produces a useless result that actually makes further actions more difficult.  The task fails spectacularly, opening the character up to derision and scorn from witnesses.  The character becomes impeded or even harmed by his failure. Conversely if Rob rolls 00, Rurik not only fails to make the jump over the chasm but goes plunging down the ravine head first. This need not lead to damage and the demise of the character, but they should definitly be at a disadvantage. There are specific Critical Success and Fumble results for weapon skill tests in combat and Discipline skill tests, which are described in the relevant chapters.  2.2 Bonus/Penalty Dice  Whenever circumastances make a skill roll easier or harder the player gains a Bonus or Penalty die. When a charac- ter has an Bonus die (+1B) in their roll they roll 2D10s for the tens and a D10 for the units.   You keep the best roll for the tens to see if you rolled successfully. A Penalty die (-1P) means again rolling 2D10 for the tens but you keep the worse roll. It is possible to have  10   Chapter 2.   Skills

=== PAGE 13 ===

multiple Bonus or Penalty dice, e.g. +2B, in which case you roll 3D10 for the tens and keep the best. Note, that if you get both a Bonus and a Penalty die they will cancel each other out. Example  Whilst at the Royal Court, Rurik is asked to compose a clever and stimulating poem for the hard to please Count of Malvon.   The Gamemaster asks Rurik to roll with a Penalty die.   Rurik has Performance 35% and rolls 3D10s (2D10 for the tens and a D10 for the units). He rolls 7, 5 for the tens and 1 for the units for a result of 51 which fails the test. After displeasing the Count, Rurik tries to hurdle a small wall while being pursued by the Count’s guards. The Gamemaster rules that this is an easy task, so Rurik rolls with a Bonus die. He has an Athletics skill of 60% and rolls 5, 2 for the tens and 9 for the units for a result of 29 which passes the check.  2.2.1   ⋆   Applying Bonus/Penalty dice  Bonus and Penalty dice should only be applied when they have a significant effect on the character’s chance of success. Only apply when it is important and brings something to the story. Broadly speaking, there are three areas where the Gamemaster should grant a skill Bonus or Penalty die. The three areas are:  As a result of the task being inherently easy or dif- ficult.  As a result of planning.  As a result of good roleplaying.  ▶   As a result of the task being inherently easy or difficult.  Some things are just naturally easier or harder to do than others. For example, climbing a steep cliff with natural hand holds and with the proper equipment (e.g.   ropes and iron spikes) is a normal task. Doing the same climb in the pouring rain, will introduce a Penalty die (-1P) and if the character has also forgotten his ropes and spikes then this gives two Penalty dice (-2P). In comparison, climbing a cliff where there are nu- merous ledges, and where the character can rest and actually walk up the cliff in places becomes very easy giving two Bonus dice (+2B).  ▶   As a result of planning  The Players have outlined how their characters prepares to perform a task well in advance. If their plan is a sound and good one you should make the skill test Easy. Con- versely, if the Players have given no thought as to how their characters approach a complex task which really does require preparation and planning, then make the resulting skill test Hard. Example  Several adventuring groups, in search of a lost temple, are about to enter the Badlands, a notoriously harsh wilderness where it is hard to find water and food. The Gamemaster has decided in advance to ask the players to make Natural Lore skill tests, to see how their characters fare in this unforgiving environment. Flynn’s Riders spend an extra couple of days in the city planning and preparing for the trip.   They buy more than adequate supplies and equipment, along with the extra beasts of burden to carry them. Their scholars visit the local Temple of Knowledge and beg, borrow and steal maps of the Badlands, brought back by pre- vious explorers.   Finally, they manage to track down a guide, a survivor of a previous expedition, and per- suade him to come along.   The Gamemaster awards them with two Bonus dice (+2B) to their Survival roll. The Red Hand Gang makes the traditional prepara- tions for any journey. They ensure they have enough supplies, but take no back up mounts or proper trav- eling clothing. In this case the Gamemaster asks for a normal Survival roll on account of their preparation. Alber’s Lucky Five decide to live up to their name and simply decide, as soon as they hear about the lost tem- ple, to ride out into the Badlands on the horses they arrived on, without replenishing supplies. The Game- master gives two Penalty dice (-2P) to their Survival roll as a result of their rashness.  ▶   As a result of Good Roleplaing  This usually happens for skills that involve some form of communication, like Influence.   When the Player de- scribes the action of their character, the exchange be- tween their character and the non-player character(s) being influenced may be roleplayed out.   If the player was entertaining, kept in character and added to the fun of the game, the Gamemaster may award them a  11 Chapter 2.   Skills

=== PAGE 14 ===

Bonus die (+1B) or even two Bonus dice (+2B).   In exceptional circumstances, where the player reduced ev- eryone to tears of laughter, or was outstanding in their portrayal of their character, the Gamemaster may waive the necessity for the skill test completely.   Remember good storytelling always comes before any dice rolling.  2.3 Opposed Skill Tests  Opposed skill tests are made by both characters who are in direct competition with each other.   Both char- acters make the skill tests as normal, rolling 1D100 and attempting to roll equal to or under their skill.  2.3.1   ⋆   One Character Succeeds  If one character succeeds their skill test and the other fails, then the successful character has won the opposed skill test.  2.3.2   ⋆   Both Characters Succeed  If both characters succeed then whoever rolled the high- est in their skill test wins the opposed test.   However if one character rolls a critical, while the other rolls an ordinary success, then the character that rolled the crit- ical, which is regarded as a higher level of success, wins.  2.3.3   ⋆   Both Characters Fail  Whoever rolled the lowest in their skill test wins the opposed test.   In the case of ties for both the Player wins. Example  It’s curfew in the big city and Rurik fancies going to the after hours drinking session at a local tavern. As he heads down the street towards the ale house, he sees a member of the city’s police force, the Watch, walking up the opposite side of the street. Rurik, be- ing Rurik, decides to sneak past the watchman, by creeping up the dark side of the street. The Gamemaster calls for a Deception skill test from Rurik, since this skill deals with sneaking. Rurik’s De- ception skill is only 22% as he is big, clumsy and trained as a warrior and not a thief.   Simultane- ously the Gamemaster makes a Perception skill test for the watchman.   The watchman’s Perception is 40%, because this is what he does for a living ev- ery night.   Fortunately for Rob, Rurik’s player, the Gamemaster decides that being on the shadowy side of the street significantly helps Rurik, giving him a Bonus die (+1B), which means that Rurik’s will roll 2D10 for the tens and keep the best. If Rurik rolls a 1 he gets a Critical success and manages to slip past the watchman, regardless of whether he succeeds or not. The watchman would only see Rurik if he rolled a higher Critical himself. If Rurik rolls a 7 and gets a success and the watch- man rolls 55 and fails. Rurik sneaks past him on the darkened side of the street. If Rurik rolls a 65 and fails and the watchman rolls 30 and gets a success. The watchman spots a shape in the shadows and heads over to investigate. If Rurik rolls a 15 and succeeds, as does the watchman who rolls a 9, then Rurik wins and evades him because he rolled the highest roll. The watchman thought he saw a shape in the shadows, but it’s gone so quickly that he thinks no more of it. If Rurik rolls a 65 and the watchman rolls 75, then even though both fail, Rurik wins again because he rolled the lower of the two. Although Rurik stumbled out of the shadows badly at one stage, the watchman is so lost in his own thoughts that he is completely oblivious to Rurik’s blunder. Rurik evades him.  2.4 Very High Skills  Character’s with Skills over 100% are considered Masters in their fields and under normal circumstances do not fail and quite often perform tasks that are considered impossible by normal people.  2.4.1   ⋆   Opposed Tests  In opposed skill tests a character with a skill over 100% will reduce the difference of their skill to 100 from all participants, including themselves.  12   Chapter 2.   Skills

=== PAGE 15 ===

Example  Grazum The Blackheart, an evil Orc Warlord is a Mas- ter Wrestler with an Athletics skill of 120%.   Rurik, with an Athletics skill of 60%, recklessly challenges him to an arm wrestling contest. In this opposed skill roll both skills will be reduced by 20% (100% and 40% respectively) and then apply the opposed roll normally.  2.5 Assistance  Characters will often have the opportunity to help each other during various skill tests.   If one or more charac- ters can assist and make a significant contribution then they can offer a Bonue die (+1B). On rare occasions the assistance will provide +2B (GMs discretion). The as- sisting character or characters must have the appropriate helping skill at a suitable level determined by the Game- master. How high this needs to be is usually dependant on the difficulty of the test. In most cases as long as the assisting character has a skill of at least Apprentice level (26%+) then they can help. Example  Rurik is trying to force open an old and mouldy door. If Abnon with an Athletics of 50% helps him, Rurik will roll Athletics with a Bonus die.  2.6 Skill Descriptions  This is the full list of skills in alphabetical order.  2.6.1   ⋆   Athletics ( DEX   +   ST R )  This broad skill covers a range of athletic activities useful to adventuring characters, including acrobatics, climb- ing, jumping and swimming.  Acrobatics:   This allows a character to perform a va- riety of gymnastic and balancing tasks, such as tum- bling, walking a tightrope or keeping balance on a nar- row or unstable ledge. The character can move at half their normal speed across an unstable surface without penalty. To move at a normal rate requires an Acro- batics test. A successful Acrobatics test will also halve the damage suffered from falling.  Brute Force:   Brute force is a particular application of Athletics that relies purely on power, with no finesse involved. Brute force basically involves pushing, lift- ing or dragging.  Climbing:   Given enough hand and footholds, a char- acter can climb any surface given enough time with- out the need for a test. Under normal circumstances, a character can climb or descend one quarter of their Movement per Combat Round (see Chapter 5 Combat for details). A character can double the rate of their climb or descent by making a Hard Athletics test.  Jumping:   In general, a successful Athletics test allows a character to jump up to twice their own height hor- izontally or up to half his own height vertically, as long as he has at least five metres to run first.   If they are making a standing jump these distances are halved.   For humans, average height is roughly 1.8m which gives a jumping distance of 4m.   Penalties for jumping Athletics tests are accrued by trying to jump further.   A cumulative Penalty die (-1P) is bestowed for every extra metre the character is trying to jump.  Swimming:   Characters normally swim at half their usual Movement. Athletics tests are only required when con- ditions are less than ideal – swimming while heavily encumbered or in strong currents for example.  2.6.2   ⋆   Close Combat ( DEX   +   ST R )  This skill deals with the art of hitting things and defend- ing the character with melee weapons, such as swords, clubs, spears, polearms and shields.  2.6.3   ⋆   Craft ( IN T   + 10 )  The Craft skill is actually several separate skills (such as armourer, baker, basket weaver, blacksmith, bowyer, brewer, butcher etc) grouped under a single heading which must be improved separately.   It measures the character’s ability to make and repair items. As a very rough guide it takes one day per 50 SP to produce an item. The base cost of the item, in materials needed, is 50% of the listed finished cost.  13 Chapter 2.   Skills

=== PAGE 16 ===

2.6.4   ⋆   Culture ( IN T   + 10/ IN T   )  Each Culture skill is used to provide information about the common world view of that group of people (or crea- tures).   This includes history, politics, weather cycles, geography, superstitions and popular mythology. Culture (Own) is the world view of the people that the character is born into, which is why the character gets a +10. All other foreign or alien cultures are Culture (Other).  2.6.5   ⋆   Deception ( DEX   +   IN T   )  Deception covers the arts of:  Disguise:   used to change a character’s appearance and adopt a different outward persona.  Sleight:   used to hide or take objects, without drawing undue attention.  Stealth:   used whenever a character attempts to per- sonally evade detection by another character.   This usually happens when a character either tries to move quietly past an enemy, hide from one, or performs a combination of both. These tests are opposed by the Perception skill.  2.6.6   ⋆   Dodge ( DEX   + 10 )  The Dodge skill is used to avoid incoming objects that are swung or thrown at the character. The Dodge skill is normally used when a character attempts to dodge an incoming blow in combat or a physical hazard that can be avoided, such as falling masonry.  2.6.7   ⋆   Driving ( DEX   +   IN T   )  If a character is driving a wagon, chariot or similar ve- hicle at not more than walking pace across flat terrain, a Driving skill test will never be required. Skill tests are required when a character wants to do something out of the ordinary with a vehicle, such as traverse treacherous terrain, jump obstacles and so on.  2.6.8   ⋆   Engineering ( IN T   + 10 )  This skill is used to design, build, activate, repair, sabo- tage or disassemble large mechanisms or constructs such as siege machines, city gates and drawbridges, mine- shafts, sailing ships and so forth.  2.6.9   ⋆   Healing ( IN T   + 10 )  Use of this skill without a healer’s kit incurs a two Penalty dice (-2P). Each use of the Healing skill generally takes a few minutes to perform. Both characters must remain stationary and may not use any actions while this oc- curs or they will lose the benefits of the healing. Typical types of injuries or ailments that may be treated are listed below:  Unconsciousness   A successful Healing test can revive a character from unconsciousness, though drugged pa- tients may inflict a penalty on the Healing test.  Minor Injury   A successful Healing test on a Minor In- jury will heal 1D4 Hit Points.  Stabilise Major Wound   A successful Healing test on a Major Wound will not restore the lost Hit Points. This Healing merely stabilises the patient enough so that they will not die of blood loss.  Curing Diseases   A successful Healing test allows a dis- eased patient to add a bonus to his next opposed test of Resilience versus disease Potency to resist the dis- ease. The bonus is equal to the healer’s Healing skill divided by 10 (the critical success range).  Curing Poisons   A successful Healing test allows a poi- soned patient to attempt a second opposed test of Re- silience versus poison Potency.   The patient gains a bonus to their Resilience skill equal to the healer’s Healing skill divided by 10 (the critical success range).  Surgery   Other than magical healing, successful Surgery is the only way that a character can recover from a Ma- jor Wound.   Once a successful Healing test has been made to quench the bleeding of a Major Wound, a suc- cessful Healing test can attempt to set broken bones, stitch together rent flesh and restore the wound loca- tion so that it is on the road to recovery.   As long as the Healing test is a success, the stricken character gains one hit point and will begin to heal as normal. The use of Healing requires suitable medical equip- ment such as bandages or salves or appropriate impro- vised alternatives.  14   Chapter 2.   Skills

=== PAGE 17 ===

2.6.10   ⋆   Influence ( CHA   + 10 )  This is the art of verbally persuading another character to do what you want.   Characters can use both logical and/or emotional arguments.   If successful in an op- posed skill test, the character’s audience is temporarily swayed in favour of the character’s argument.   In time they may understand that they were fast talked, bam- boozled or hoodwinked and their judgement clouded, but in the short term they go along with what the charac- ter suggests.   Influence can never be used to get a char- acter to act against their instinct for self-preservation. Influence skill tests are normally opposed by a Per- ception, Persistence or Influence skill. They may be fur- ther influenced by how well a player roleplays the ex- change. Influenc