o fails Resilience test takes 1D4 damage per round and is incapacitated due to heavy coughing. Next round make a Resilience test to see if they compose themselves enough to overcome the incapacitating cough- ing,.They still take 1D4 damage every round that they are in the cloud.   The cloud also obscures vision, pro- viding any creature within it with cover, so that ranged attackers are at two Penalty dice (-2P) to their attack roll and that any melee in the cloud is at a Penalty die (-1P).  ▶   Personal Insight  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable This spell gives the caster or recipient a very direct insight into a small question directly relevant to them, in the form of an internal intuition. For example the question “Why can I not harm the creature?”   would get the answer “Because your sword is not enchanted”, while “Why can we not harm the creature?” would not get an answer.  ▶   Pierce  Touch This spell can be cast on any weapon with a blade or point.   For every point of Magnitude, it ignores one armour point when it strikes armour. Pierce can bypass magical armour as easily as normal armour.  ▶   Protection  For every point of Magnitude of this spell one ar- mour point is added to the armour of the target. This stacks with any existing armour and is treated in the same way.  ▶   Push/Pull  Instant, Resist (Resilience) This spell allows the caster to move an item of up to 3 SIZ or ENC per point of Magnitude either towards or away from them in a straight line, as if pushed suddenly from one direction or the other. The item is not moved with significant enough force to inflict damage unless it is naturally damaging (a bottle of acid, for instance). The caster has no control over the distance pushed or pulled, as this depends on the location of the item or the surface it rests on. Living creatures targeted by this spell are allowed a Resilience roll to resist.  ▶   Read Emotion  Magnitude 1, Non-Variable, Instant, Resist (Persistence) This spell when cast tells you what the true emo- tional state of the target is, if they fail a Persistence roll.  ▶   Resist (Element)  This spell adds a Bonus die (+1B) to Resistance tests against hostile effects, magic or otherwise, from a given element (Air/Darkness/Earth/Fire/Water) per 2 Mag- nitude, and subtracts 2 points of damage from that ele- ment per Magnitude.  ▶   Restore Energy  Instant, Touch Each point of this spell’s Magnitude instantly re- stores one fatigue level to the recipient.  ▶   Sap Energy  Instant, Touch, Resist (Resilience) Each point of this spell’s Magnitude inflicts adds one fatigue level to the target upon a failed Persistence roll.  ▶   Scare  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Resist (Persistence) On a failed resistance roll, the target is scared for 1D6 rounds. Scared targets must withdraw from combat with the caster for the duration of the spell, and move as quickly as they are able, directly away from the caster.  ▶   Second Sight  Magnitude 3, Non-Variable Second Sight allows the caster to gauge the POW of every creature and magic item within range. The spell is blocked by anything that blocks normal vision.   The caster will know if each aura created by the illuminated POW is less than his own POW, within three points of his own POW or greater than his own POW. Additionally, Second Sight provides a Bonus die (+1B) on Perception tests to notice hidden magical items or hiding people or creatures. Second Sight will also reveal invisible entities; though only a hazy image will show (treat such targets as partially obscured).  ▶   Skybolt  Magnitude 3, Non-Variable, Instant, Resist (Dodge)  46   Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 49 ===

The caster summons a lightning bolt from the heav- ens regardless of the weather. The target must be out- doors in plain view. Skybolt inflicts 2D6 points of dam- age to a single chosen target.   Only magical Armour Points offer protection against this damage.  ▶   Slip  Magnitude 1, Non-Variable, Resist (Dodge) The caster makes the ground under the target’s feet as slippery as a sheet of black ice. The target must make an Athletics roll or fall over prone.  ▶   Slow  Resist (Resilience) For every point of Magnitude of this spell the tar- get’s Movement Rate will be decreased by 2m.   A tar- get’s Movement may not be reduced to below one metre through use of this spell.  ▶   Speedart  Magnitude 2, Non-Variable, Touch, Trigger Cast on a missile this spell is triggered when it is fired.   It gives a Bonus die (+1B) to Ranged Combat and +3 damage while using the missile. A missile under the effects of Speedart cannot benefit from Fire Missile or Multi Missile.  ▶   Spirit Alarm  If any spirit crosses the boundary of the area this spell is cast upon, the caster is aware of it.   This spell does not detect the type or number of spirits that violate the ward. Each level of Magnitude of the spell protects a five metre square area.  ▶   Spirit Bane  Magnitude 2, Touch For every two points of Magnitude this spell increases the spiritual damage a character causes during Spirit Combat by one step (so a 1D4 becomes a D6, a D6 be- comes a D8 and so forth), Persistence is also increased by a Bonus die (+1B) per two points of Magnitude.  ▶   Spirit Binding Ritual  Permanent This spell must be cast on an item called a Fetish or an unintelligent natural animal with a SIZ no greater than twice the POW of the binder, which is known as a familiar. This spell allows a spirit that has been defeated in Spirit Combat by being reduced to 0 Power Points to be bound into the item or animal and be forced into the service of the caster of the spell.   The item or familiar must be at hand as the spirit is defeated, so that the Spirit can be bound into it. The bound spirit has limited perception and abilities as listed below.   The spell cost only 1 PP to cast per Spirit Bound in a Fetish and 2 PP for a Familiar, but the act of binding a spirit cost 1 Improvement Point for a Fetish and 2 for a Familiar.  Retained Powers   The bound spirit retains its INT, POW and CHA, It also retains any memories or knowl- edge it had before it was bound.   It also possesses any skills it had in its spiritual form, such as Lore. The Spirit’s Persistence, remains the same as before. Dodge is recalculated if appropriate.  Spirit Bond   A bound spirit is forced into loyalty by the ritual. The bond also creates a spiritual link between the Binder and Spirit, this allows them to communi- cate telepathically over a distance equal to the Binder POW in kilometers.  Spirit Perception   All bound spirits can sense other Spirits within a range equal to its POW in metres. The spirit can tell if they are bound or discorporate and what type of spirit.  Cast Magic   The owner of a Bound Spirit can force the spirit to cast any Magic that the Spirit knows, using its own Power Points.   The skill to cast the Magic is equal to the skill of the Bound Spirit and not the controlling character. If the spirit uses Divine Magic then it cannot regain its Divine Spells once they are used, until it is released.  Magic Reservoir   The binder of the spirit can draw upon its Power Points to cast their spells and ritu- als, but if their Bound Spirit is reduced to 0 Power Points it is automatically released.  47 Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 50 ===

Physical Limitations   A bound spirit cannot talk, ex- cept telepathically with its holder, unless it has appro- priate magic such as Mindspeech. Spirits bound into Fetishes cannot move.  Familiar Abilities   An animal that has been turned into a Familiar has all of the usual abilities of that creature (an otter can swim, an eagle can fly and a horse can be ridden), Initially for 1D6 days after the Familiar is created it suffers a Penalty die (-1P) to all its abilities, as the Spirit becomes accustomed to its new body. A Gamemaster may rule that a Bound Spirit could learn special skills, for example a Bound Spirit in a Parrot could talk, a Monkey could write or an Eagle scratch letters into wood to communicate.  Physical Form   The bound spirit has Hit Points equal to the familiar or Fetish that it is bound into. If the familiar is killed or the Fetish is broken then the spirit is instantly freed and returns to the Spirit World.  Spirit Combat   A Bound Spirit cannot initiate spirit combat, but may be attacked by another Spirit or Shaman in the normal manner. A Bound Spirit driven to 0 Power Points is sent back to the Spirit Plane and cannot be rebound. A Bound Spirit defends with its original Spirit Damage rating.  Releasing Bound Spirits   A Bound Spirit can be re- leased by its captor at any time or by the ways listed above.  Special Powers   There are many different types of spirit. The Gamemaster may allow at their discretion for each type of spirit to manifest its innate powers in the Fetish or Familiar into which is to bound. A disease spirit may make the animal immune to disease, but become an active carrier.   A Pain Spirit may cause a sword to invoke crippling pain against opponents. The manifestation of this ability may cost additional PPs or Improvement Points.  Limit to Bound Spirits   Unless the player is a Shaman they can only have Bound Spirits equal to ¼ of their POW. A Shaman can have spirits equal to ½ their POW. If the captors POW drops then this limit changes and the character will be automatically be forced to choose which spirits to lose.  Binding Guardian Spirits   When a Guardian is bound to a post it is given a set of conditions as to when it is to attack opponents, the first condition is free, but each subsequent one cost one Improvement Point. All conditions must include a termination point.   Typi- cal conditions include: you must guard this gate until the temple falls or you must watch over this Tomb for a hundred years or you must guard this child until he becomes a man. Guardian spirits remain at their post until the conditions are broken or the spirit is de- feated and returned to the Spirit World. They do not count as part of the binders limit to Bound Spirits, but no character may bind more than ½ their POW in Guardians.  ▶   Spirit Shield  Magnitude 2 This spell forms a magical barrier that protects the caster from Power Point loss as the result of a success- ful attack during Spirit Combat (see page 49).   Each two points of Magnitude reduces the damage done by an attacking spirit by one point.  ▶   Strength  Touch For every two points of Magnitude of this spell, the target’s Damage increases by +2 and strength based ath- letics tests gain a Bonus die (+1B). Note the Damage increase is not treated as magical damage.  ▶   Talk to Animal  Magnitude 3, Non-Variable With this spell the recipient is able to talk to any beast within ten metres of them.   This communication is verbal, therefore the recipient must be able to speak and be heard by the target animal.  ▶   Thunder’s Voice  Magnitude 2 This spell grants the caster a thunderous voice of command. For every 2 points of Magnitude of this spell, the caster has a Bonus die (+1B) added to his Influence skill and can also be heard at up to the spell’s Magnitude x 100 in metres.  48   Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 51 ===

▶   Tongues (Language)  Magnitude 3, Non-Variable This spell allows the recipient to speak another lan- guage perfectly for its duration.  ▶   Truth Seeker  Instant This spell grants the caster a Bonus die (+1B) per 2 points of Magnitude to their next Skill Test they make to discover lies, secrets or hidden objects. It does not stack with any other spell-effect bonuses.  ▶   Unlock  Touch, Instant This spell has a chance of opening a lock equal to the spell’s Magnitude x 20%. If cast on a lock that has had a Lock spell cast on it, the test is an Opposed Test vs the Magnitude x 20% of the Lock spell.  ▶   Vigour  Touch For every point of Magnitude of this spell, the tar- get’s Hit Points score increases by +2.   A target can- not have its Hit Points increased in this way to more than twice its original score. Damage is taken from the ‘magical’ Hit Points first, so when the spell dissipates the damage that was inflicted on the magical Hit Points disappears too.   The Major Wounds level needs to be recalculated appropriately.  ▶   Vomit  Resist (Resilience) This spell incapacitates its Victim for 1 round per point of Magnitude, due to uncontrollable vomiting. On a fumbled resilience roll the Victim takes 1D6 Hit Points damage.  ▶   Walk on (Element)  Magnitude 3 This spell allows the recipient to walk on the speci- fied element (Air/Darkness/Earth/Fire/Water) without sinking or taking any harm from what is being walked on for the spell’s duration. With this spell for the appropri- ate element, the caster can walk across lava, quicksand, water, or even through the air.   Each additional point of Magnitude increases the duration of the spell by 1 minute.  ▶   Water Breath  Touch This spell allows the target to breathe water for the duration of the spell. For every point of Magnitude, one additional person can breathe water, or the duration is increased by one minute. Water Breath does not affect on the target’s ability to breathe air.  ▶   Weapon Enhance  Touch This spell can be cast on any close combat weapon or any unarmed attack. For every 2 points of Magnitude, it increases the chance to hit with the weapon by a Bonus die (+1B) and deals two points of extra damage.   This extra damage is magical and will affect creatures that can only be hurt by magic. The weapon’s base damage remains non-magical. A weapon under the effects of this spell cannot benefit from Fire Weapon.  7.3 Spirits  Spirits are supernatural beings of deceased sentient be- ings that for some reason did not pass in the Spirit World.   They instead linger in the physical world as translucent figures or sometimes completely invisible. They can only be interacted with using spells (see previous section) unless the spirits initiate combat with a character to possess them.  7.3.1   ⋆   Spirit Combat  In cases of aggressive spirits Spirit Combat will occur. This is the clash of spiritual energies, each trying to over- come and dominate the other.  ▶   Combat Process  Resolve Spirit Combat using an opposed skill check.  If also part of physical combat, then spirit combat occurs instantaneously in real-time.   Resolve the spirit combat in its entirety before continuing with the rest of the combat round.   Only magic spells related to Spirit Combat can be used.  Use the spirit’s Spirit Combat for the opposed skill check.  Player characters use either Persistence skill.  The combatant who loses the spirit combat test loses 1D6 Power Points, minus the magnitude of any Spirit Shield or similar protective magic they may have cast upon them.  The more powerful a spirit is, the more damage it does. For every ten points of POW above 20 a spirit combatant gains an extra +1D6 to the dam- age they do in spirit combat.  49 Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 52 ===

If a combatant’s Power Points are 0 or less, it loses the combat.   If the loser is a mortal with a body and the spirit is capable of possession, the loser becomes possessed by the spirit. If the loser is the spirit it is banished and flees into the depths of the Spirit World.  At any time during Spirit Combat, if one of the combatants wins the contest three times in a row they may break away from the contest.   The op- ponent may not engage in Spirit Combat again for the victors POW in minutes.  7.3.2   ⋆   Spirit Possession  Possession is when a spirit steals or inhabits a corporeal body for its own ends. All forms of possessing spirits can be driven out by Divine Magic spell Exorcism, the Folk Magic spell Drive out Spirits or similar magics.   There are two types of possession:  ▶   Covert  This type of possession has the spirit hide in the victim’s body. It only assumes partial control of the victim when it needs to do something to the victim’s body. This is the form of possession typically used by Healing and Disease spirits. It is also the form of possession used by Ancestor Spirits.  ▶   Dominant  The spirit takes full control of the victim’s body and in turn the victim’s spirit is imprisoned in the body, un- able to do anything until the hostile spirit is exorcised or leaves.   This is the most dangerous form of posses- sion, as the spirit often cares nothing for the body it inhabits, for once the body dies the spirit returns to its old existence, in most cases, and possession by a suicidal ghost or homicidal demon is never good for the body in question.  7.4 Creating Magic Items  Most magic items found in play in a game of Fantasy Crux will have been created by the characters or Non Player Character magicians. Although the spells that their characters use to create magic items are detailed in their respective spell lists, its worth providing a summary here.  Create Charms   This is the basic spell for creating magic items. Use this spell to create rune-inscribed swords, paper talismans that protect against spirits, and dragon skin armour that is resistant to fire (via a Resist Fire spell).  Create Power Point Store   If you want to create a magic item that has Power Points already stored, so the user doesn’t have to use their own, this is the spell to use.  Create Potions   This is a quick way of making non- reusable spell stores where you’ve already spent the power points, for you or your allies to gulp down for instant effect during a combat. Think Heal + Create Potions and you have the classic Healing Potion.  7.4.1   ⋆   Identify a Magic Item  There is no catch all “Detect Magical Properties” or “Know Magic item” skill in Fantsy Crux. This is quite deliberate, keeping with the general policy that such items are not the equivalent of magical shotguns.   Some options are: Consult a Sage or other magical expert. This option will cost the characters lots of money.   Take a baseline of one hundred silvers per point of spell magnitude or some perilous quest that the character must do in re- turn. Such experts are rare, because most high ranking magicians have little time for magical research for others, and would be more interested in their own schemes. Detect Folk Magic spells. This merely tells you the item is magical.   A critical casting may tell the caster how powerful the item is. Trial and error.   The character tries to find out the item’s use by experiment. Allow creative and imagina- tive plans to reveal partially what the item does. Researching the myths and legends around the item. This is the most certain way of finding out what a magic item does. Of course such myths may be obscure them- selves, requiring a dangerous adventure to a long hidden repository of knowledge to find.  50   Chapter 7.   Folk Magic

=== PAGE 53 ===

CHAPTER 8  Arcane Magic  Arcane Magic is an approach to magic that acknowl- edges that there are magical rules that govern the Uni- verse and that by studying these rules a Magician can manipulate reality to his will. Often Arcane Magic is atheistic, regarding gods and spirits as merely intelligent forces of the Universe, that exist to be interacted with and dealt with on an equal footing. Practitioners of Arcane Magic develop in one of two ways.   The majority are organised into schools of wiz- ardry, which have their own books of spells and rules that they teach their apprentices. Alternatively, there is a long tradition of practitioners working in solitude, cut off from other Arcane Magic users and society at large, to focus purely on their magical activities. Occasionally they take on an apprentice, to teach their art, or simply as a helping hand around the magical laboratory.  8.1 Arcane Magic Ranks  Some schools may have ranks but that will depend on the specific campaign. Regardless, the skill increase bestows certain benefits.  Apprentices:   Students of Arcane Magic who will only know a couple of spells at an Arcane Magic Casting skill of 26% to 50%. Apprentices can spend two Im- provement Points to create Arcane Crystals. An Ar- cane Crystal focuses up to one spell that the character knows per ten points of Arcane Magic Casting. These spells can be changed in the downtime between adven- tures, and have a star placed against the spell name on the character sheet to show they are focused.   Spells that are focused by the Arcane Crystal increase the character’s Arcane Magic Casting (Bonus die (+1B) when used to all casting tests). The character is aware of where the Crystal is at all times and the enchant- ments placed upon it make it indestructible to non- magical means.  Mages:   Graduates of the schools of wizardry or equiv- alent.   They will know between five and ten spells, and will have an Arcane Magic Casting skill rang- ing from 51% to 90%.   Mages can choose to spend two Improvements Points to create an Arcane Power Store item that allows storing up to POW additional Power Points. It can be any item, like a staff, medal- lion, ring, sword, etc. The character is aware of where this item is at all times and the enchantments placed upon the Arcane Power Store makes it indestructible to non-magical means.  Archmages:   Acknowledged masters of Arcane Magic. They will have at least ten spells and an Arcane Magic Casting skill of 90%+. Archmages can choose to spend two additional Improvement Points to improve their Arcane Power Store item to store a maximum of POWx2 Power Points. An Archmage with Arcane Magic mas- tery can spend two Improvement Points to Transcend.  8.1.1   ⋆   Transcendence  The Archmage has such high knowledge of the laws of Arcane Magic that they are no longer part of the Real World. Their body changes from a physical one, based upon CON and SIZ with hit points, to one based on pure magical energy, based upon POW and power points.  ▶   Requirements  Arcane Magic Casting at 101%.  POW at maximum (21 for humans).  Must know 10 different Arcane Magic spells.  ▶   Benefits  They are immune to disease and poison, unless they specifically target POW or power points, and  51 Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 54 ===

instead of taking damage to hit points, they take them to power points.  Spells which heal a physical body, such as Heal, Treat Wounds, and Divine Heal, do not work on the Archmage’s new magical form.   Instead, an Archmage will transfer stored power points, such as those held in their Arcane Power Store, back into their magical body.   This takes one combat round and is an action that requires full concen- tration to complete.  Defensive spells that protect against physical harm, such as Damage Resistance, still do so.   As does physical armour, although an Archmage is more likely to use magical means to protect themselves.  The character no longer ages physically and is con- sidered immortal. For many player characters, Transcending is the end of their story in-game, with the player retiring the char- acter from play. If the player has ideas of how the Tran- scended character can continue, they should discuss that with their Gamemaster to work out further adventures. Most non-player character Transcended Masters choose to withdraw from the Real World, using their new magi- cal body to explore Other Worlds and the other avenues of magical power that open up to them.   They often maintain a link with the Real World, where favoured students can contact them for sentimental reasons.  8.2 Spot Rules  8.2.1   ⋆   Learning Arcane Magic  Arcane Magic is governed by the Arcane Magic Cast- ing skill. The base chance for Arcane Magic Casting is INT. Spells are learnt separately, but the Arcane Magic Casting skill determines the success for casting all Ar- cane Magic spells. Characters learn Arcane Magic from other characters who know the practice.   It costs eight Improvement Points to get access to the Arcane Magic discipline.   The character gains the Mystic Vision spell for free.  8.2.2   ⋆   Learning Spells  Before a spell can be cast using Arcane Magic, the fol- lowing process must be followed:   The character must first learn the spell through research. In order to learn a particular Arcane Magic spell, the caster must possess the spell in written form or be taught by a teacher. In game terms this means having access to a teacher who knows the spell or a book or scroll where it is written down. The player then spends two Improvement Points and writes the spell down on their character sheet. Once the Arcane Magic spell has been learned, the character will be ready to try casting it.  8.2.3   ⋆   Casting Spells  A character must be able to gesture with his hands, and be able to chant, in order to cast a spell.   Whenever a spell is cast using Arcane Magic, there will always be a sight and sound that nearby creatures can detect, be it a flash of light, a crack of thunder, or a shimmering in the air. The exact effects are up to the Gamemaster and Player to decide, but will automatically be detected by any creatures within 10 metres per Magnitude of the spell. Casting an Arcane Magic spell requires a successful skill test using the Arcane Magic Casting skill.   If suc- cessful, the spell takes effect. If the casting test fails, the spell does not take effect.  ▶   Power Points  All Arcane Magic spells cost a base of one Power Point to cast.   Arcane Magic spells can be modifying as the caster wishes (if he has the appropriate Power Points). If a Manipulation effect is applied to a spell, each effect costs one Power Point to apply (see below).  The result of the Arcane Magic casting test depends on its success:  Success:   A number of Power Points are deducted from the spellcaster’s total, equal to the Manipulation ef- fects Power Points plus one of the spell.   The spell then takes effect.  Failure:   The spell does not take effect and the character loses one Power Point for the base spell cost.  Critical:   Any attempt to resist or counter the spell suf- fers a Penalty die (-1P). Moreover, only the base cost of one Power Point is lost (not for any Manipulations).  Fumble:   The spell fails and the Arcane Magic user loses 1D6 Power Points in addition to normal Power Point loss.  52   Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 55 ===

Power Points   Magnitude   Duration   Range  1 (Default)   1   5 minutes   10m +1   2   15 minutes   20m +2   3   30 minutes   40m +3   4   1 hour   80m +4   5   2 hours   160m +5   6   4 hours   320m +6   7   12 hours   640m +7   8   1 day   1km +8   9   2 day   2km +9   10   5 day   5km +10   11   1 week   10km +11   12   2 weeks   20km +12   13   1 month   50km +13   14   2 months   100km +14   15   3 months   200km +15   16   6 months   500km +16   17   1 year   1000km +17   18   2 years   2000km +18   19   5 years   5000km +19   20   10 years   10000km  Table 8.1: Arcane Magic Manipulations  ▶   Casting Time  No other Combat Action may be taken while casting a spell, though the character may slowly walk up to half their Movement. A spell takes effect at the end of its casting, which starts at the beginning of the Combat Round and ends on the caster’s Combat Order. Note that while spellcast- ing, a character will draw possible attacks from enemies they are adjacent to during a Combat Round. Distractions or attacks on the spellcaster as he casts will either automatically ruin the spell (if the spellcaster is blinded or suffers a Major Wound) or require Persis- tence tests for them to maintain concentration on the spell.  ▶   Spell Manipulations  Arcane Magic spells have three basic effects which can be manipulated by the caster: Magnitude, Duration, and Range. Each effect has a default value which the spell can be cast at, costing one Power Point. The default value for the spell effects are listed in table 8.1. The tens value of the caster’s Arcane Magic Casting skill determines the max number of additional Power Points that can be spent on each of the manipulation types. Example  Omar the Magnificent with an Arcane Magic Casting skill of 80% can spend an additional 8 Power Points on manipulating each of the spell’s effects, in Magnitude, Duration and Range. That’s a manipulation of up to 8 levels for each effect, not 8 levels in total across all three effects.  The decision of which effects to manipulate and how many extra Power Points are to be spent is made before the spell is cast. Example  Lura casts Damage Boosting on Rurik’s sword, and wants it to be at a magnitude of 4 for an hour. She has an Arcane Magic Casting skill of 60%, which means she can spend an additional six Power Points on manipulating any spell’s effects.   Looking at the Manipulation table, Lura can comfortably manage a Magnitude of 4, for three additional Power Points, and can manage a duration of an hour with another three points. Lura’s player rolls the dice and compares the result against Lura’s casting skill of 60% to see whether she successful casts the spell. In fact Lura, can spend a maximum of six points on a magnitude of range 640m, another six on a duration of 12 hours and another 6 on a magnitude of 7, which is a total of 19 Power Points (18 for the manipulations and 1 for the spell itself).  ▶   Dismissing Spells  In a single Combat Round, a caster can dismiss any Per- manent spell(s) he has cast, as a free action. Ceasing to cast a Concentration spell is immediate and not an ac- tion.  ▶   Extra Power Points  As you can probably work out from the example above, it is possible for an Arcane Magic user to cast a spell which needs more Power Points in its manipulated form than an Arcane Magic user will normally have. Arcane Magic users get round this by carrying either Power Point stores (see Folk Magic spell Create Magic Store) or other arti- facts that can store Power Points (e.g. from other disci- plines).  8.2.4   ⋆   Spell Traits  All Arcane Magic spells share the same basic qualities:  Base Magnitude of one  Duration of 5 minutes, and  Range of 10 metres.  53 Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 56 ===

Other traits used by spells are detailed below.  Concentration:   The spell’s effects will remain in place as long as the character concentrates on it.   Concen- trating on a spell is functionally identical to casting the spell, requiring the spell caster to continue to ges- ture with both arms, chant and ignore distractions. This trait overrides the normal Arcane Magic spell default Duration.  Instant:   The spell’s effects take place instantly.   The spell itself then disappears. This trait overrides the normal Arcane Magic spell default Duration.  Permanent:   The spell’s effects remain in place until they are dispelled or dismissed. This trait overrides the normal Arcane Magic spell default Duration.  Resist (Dodge/Persistence/Resilience):   The spell’s intended effects do not succeed automatically.   The target may make a Dodge, Persistence or Resilience test (as specified by the spell) in order to avoid the effect of the spell entirely. Note that Resist (Dodge) spells require the target to be able to use Reactions in order to Dodge. In the case of Area spells, the Resist (Dodge) trait requires the target to dive in order to mitigate the spell’s effect.  Touch:   Touch spells require the character to actually touch his target for the spell to take effect, using an Unarmed skill test to make contact.  8.3 Spells  ▶   Animate (Substance)  Concentration This spell allows the caster to animate the substance indicated, up to one SIZ for every point of Magnitude. The caster can cause it to move about and interact clum- sily (Movement of 1m per three points of Magnitude). The caster’s chance to have the animated object per- form any physical skill successfully is equal to his own chance to perform that action halved (before any modi- fiers). If the appropriate Form/Set spell is cast immedi- ately after this spell, the caster can perform much finer manipulation of the object.   In this case, the animated object will use the caster’s full skill scores for physical activities. This spell can only be used on inanimate matter.  ▶   Cast Back  This protective spell offers a chance of sending hos- tile spells (Arcane Magic and Folk Magic) back to the attacking spell caster. Cast Back only affects spells that target the user specifically and have the Resist trait.   Such spells may affect the protected character normally, but if it is re- sisted, the spell is launched back at the person who cast it, as long as its Magnitude is not greater than the Cast Back’s Magnitude.  ▶   Create Familiar  Permanent This spell allows the caster to make a personal sac- rifice in order to create a Familiar.   The Nature of the Familiar is dependent on the setting, but the spell typ- ically only works on a non-sentient animal.   The spell takes one hour to perform. The typical cost of ingredi- ents for the spell is 100 Gold Pieces and it requires 3 Improvement Points.  An Arcane Magic user can have up to one Familiar for every ten points of Power they have.  A Familiar uses the animal as the template for stats.  A Familiar gains sentience when created equal to 2D6 INT and Power equal to 2D6 POW, unless the animal had a higher score, in which case that POW is used.  A Familiar has a permanent mental connection with its master;   with a range equal to 1/2 the caster’s POW in kilometres. Through this link the Familiar can allow the caster to ‘see’ through its perceptual abilities.   The Arcane Magic user can cast spells on the Familiar as if touching it and the Familiar can cast any spells it knows on its master.  A Familiar’s characteristics, skills and magic can be increased by the player spending Improvement Points, as they would for the character.  When a Familiar is destroyed or killed the Arcane Magic user loses 1D6 Hit Points from the trauma. Half the Improvement Points spent on the famil- iar return to the character’s pool of Improvement Points.  ▶   Damage Boosting  Touch This spell can be cast upon any weapon up to five ENC. Each point of Magnitude adds one point to the weapon’s damage (the basic spell will increase a hatchet from 1D6 damage to 1D6+1 damage, for instance).  ▶   Damage Resistance  Touch This spell protects the body of the recipient.   Any incoming attack dealing damage equal to or less than the Magnitude of the spell is ignored. Any incoming attack dealing more damage than the Magnitude of Damage Resistance is unaffected and will deal its full damage  54   Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 57 ===

as normal. Note that the protected character may still suffer from Knockback if applicable.  ▶   Diminish (Characteristic)  Resist(Persistence/Resilience), Touch There are actually seven Diminish spells, one for each Characteristic. The spell will temporarily apply a penalty to the specified Characteristic equal to the Magnitude of the spell. The penalty applied by this spell may not reduce a Characteristic below one and a creature must have the Characteristic in question to be affected by this spell. Diminish (STR, DEX, CON and SIZ) are resisted with Resilience.   Diminish (INT, POW and CHA) are resisted with Persistence. Applying a penalty to POW does not reduce the character’s Power Points. Note that not all uses of this spell are malicious. Thieves and others often value the timely use of a Di- minish (SIZ) spell, as it can greatly enhance their ability to enter restricted areas.  ▶   Dominate (Species)  Resist(Persistence) This spell allows the caster to gain control over a creature belonging to a specific species.   If the target fails to resist the spell, it must obey the commands of the caster for the duration of the spell. The controlled creature shares a telepathic link with the caster by which it can receive its orders. If the caster and the creature dominated do not share a common lan- guage, the caster can order it about by forming a mental image of the actions they wish the dominated creature to perform.  ▶   Energy Projection (Type)  Ranged, Instant, Resist(Dodge) Energy is either projected as a beam or a ball towards the target, which can avoid the attack by Dodging. If the spell takes effect the target takes damage equal to double the Magnitude of the spell. Physical Armour does not protect against the damage, but magical protec- tion does. Types of energy that can be projected by this spell are Cold (Dark), Lightning, Heat (Fire), Shards of Rock (Earth), Windblast (Air).  ▶   Enhance (Characteristic)  Touch There are actually seven Enhance spells, one for each Characteristic.   Essentially the reverse of the Diminish spell, Enhance allows the caster to temporarily apply a bonus to the specified Characteristic equal to the Mag- nitude of the spell.   A creature must have the Charac- teristic in question to be affected by this spell. Applying a bonus to POW does not increase the char- acter’s Power Points.  ▶   Fly  Concentration, Resist (Persistence) Using this spell allows the caster (or whomever or whatever he targets with the spell) to fly.   The caster may levitate a number of objects or characters (the caster counting as one of these characters if he so wishes). A levitated character may not be Overloaded and must have a SIZ Characteristic which is lower than the caster’s POW characteristic. Objects must have an ENC lower than the caster’s POW characteristic. Characters or objects moved by this spell have a base Movement Rate of 6m. All objects and characters moved by this spell move at the spellcaster’s behest, not their own. Each point of the spell’s Magnitude may either be used to increase the target’s Movement by +2m or to target an additional object or character – but not both. An Arcane Magic user casting this spell at Magnitude 4 may fly himself with a Movement of 12m, fly himself and a friend with a Movement of 8m each, or fly himself and three friends with a Movement of 6m each.  ▶   Form/Set (Substance)  Instant There are an unlimited number of Form/Set spells in existence, one for every substance imaginable, from steel to smoke to water. Each point of Magnitude allows the caster to shape one ENC of solid substance or one cubic metre of an  55 Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 58 ===

ethereal substance (like darkness). The caster must be Familiar with the shape he is forming. When the caster has finished the forming process, the substance retains its shape.   Rigid substances like steel will hold the form they had at the end of the spell, while more mutable substances like water will immediately lose their shape. This spell can be used to mend damage done to an object. The caster must form the entire object and must succeed at an appropriate Craft test. If successful he will restore the item to its original condition. This spell can only be used on inanimate substances.  ▶   Glow  This spell causes a glowing point of light to appear on a solid substance. At its base, the spell creates an area of light one metre in radius, giving off the same illumi- nation as a candle. Each additional point of Magnitude increases the radius of effect by one metre.   At Magni- tude 3, the brightness of the spell increases to that of a flaming brand at its centre. At Magnitude 5, it increases to that of a campfire and at Magnitude 10 to that of a bonfire. This spell can be cast on an opponent’s eyes. If cast on a living being the spell also gains the Resist (Dodge) trait. If the target fails to resist it, he will suffer a penalty to all attack, parry and Dodge tests, as well as any skills relying upon vision, equal to five times the spell’s Mag- nitude, until the spell ends or is dispelled.  ▶   Hamper  Resist (Resilience) Each point of Magnitude of Hamper subtracts 1m from the Movement rate of the target. Every two points of Magnitude also subtracts 1 from the recipient’s Com- bat Order.  ▶   Haste  Each point of Magnitude of Haste adds 1m to the Movement rate of the recipient.   Every two points of Magnitude also adds +1 to the recipient’s Combat Or- der.  ▶   Holdfast  Touch This spell causes two adjacent ten centimetre by ten centimetre surfaces (roughly the size of a man’s palm) to commingle into one. The basic bond has a STR of 1. Each additional point of Magnitude will either increase the STR of the bond by +1 or double the area affected. This spell can affect organic and inorganic substances. If the caster is attempting to bond a living being with this spell, the spell gains the Resist (Resilience) trait.  ▶   Make Scroll  Permanent These are written items which store Arcane Magic Spells. All scrolls have an attached cost of 2 Gold Pieces per magnitude of spell in ingredients for special inks/parch- ments, etc. The resulting scroll is a one-use item which, upon a successful Arcane Magic Casting test, casts the spell(s) with any manipulations, at the magnitude that was cast on the scroll. Alternatively, upon a successful Arcane Magic Cast- ing the reader of the scroll can learn the spell by spending the appropriate number of Improvement Points. Either way, upon a successful use of the scroll, the spell fades from the scroll.   If the casting roll merely fails the spell remains, but the reader can not attempt to use the scroll until their Arcane Magic Casting skill increases.   If the casting roll is fumbled the spell fades from the scroll, without any benefit to the reader.  ▶   Make Spell Matrix  Permanent This spell creates items that store Arcane Magic spells. The enchanter pays 2 Improvement Point per spell stored in the matrix. All spell matrices have an attached cost of 20 Gold Pieces per spell in special materials. The wielder can cast and manipulate the spell at the skill of the original enchanter, using their own Power Points as fuel. Spell matrices are mundane items in their own right and if the item is broken, then the spell is dispelled. However at the time of enchantment the enchanter can spend another Improvement Point to magically harden the item, making it indestructible to non-magical means.  ▶   Mirage  Touch This spell creates an illusion based on all five senses. The illusion will seem real and solid unless the person looking at it succeeds in a Perception test. If the viewer succeeds in a Perception test and the Illusion could usu- ally cause damage if believed in, it can no longer cause damage to that character.   As soon as a viewer disbe- lieves the illusion it becomes insubstantial and ghost-like to him. The Size and the strength of the illusion is governed by the Magnitude. A Magnitude 1 Illusion creates ob- jects or creatures up to SIZ 10 and viewers have three  56   Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 59 ===

Bonus dice (+3B) to their Perception modifier test to disbelieve the illusion.   For every extra Magnitude the caster can choose to either increase the size by 10 or ap- ply a Penalty die (-1P) to the Perception modifier test. Thus, with 5 Magnitude a caster could create a creature up to SIZ 30 with a Bonus die (+1B) to notice it. A positive Perception modifier means that the illu- sion is slightly fuzzy and unreal round the edges while a negative modifier means that it is indistinguishable from the real thing.  ▶   Mystic Vistion  Concentration This spell allows the recipient to literally see magic. By augmenting the recipient’s natural vision, the spell allows them to see a creature’s Power Points, as well as enchanted items with their own Power Points or spells. The recipient must be able to actually see the creature or object for this spell to work. Mystic Vision also allows a recipient to see into the Spirit World. On a normal success the recipient of the spell will only know roughly how many Power Points an object or creature has (1–10, 11–20, 21–30 and so forth).   On a critical they will know exactly. On a fumble the Game- master should give the player a misleading total. By looking at a spell effect, a recipient of Mystic Vision will automatically be aware of its magical origin (Arcane Magic, Divine Magic or Folk Magic).   By in- creasing the Magnitude of Mystic Vision, the caster can learn more about what he is seeing. Compare the Mag- nitude of Mystic Vision to the Magnitude of any spell that the target is either casting or under the influence of. As long as Mystic Vision’s Magnitude exceeds the other spell’s, the caster will be able to precisely determine the effects of the perceived spell, and a mental image of who cast the spell (if it is not obvious). By looking at an enchanted item, a recipient of Mys- tic Vision will automatically be aware of its gross magical effects (such as the types of enchantment currently on the item).   Each point of Magnitude of Mystic Vision will also determine either the invested POW (and there- fore the relevant strength) of a particular enchantment or a particular condition laid upon an enchantment, at the Gamemaster’s choice.  ▶   Neutralise Magic  Instant This spell allows a caster to neutralise other spells. Neutralise Magic will eliminate a combined Magnitude of spells equal to its own Magnitude, starting with the most powerful affecting the target. If it fails to eliminate the most powerful spell then it will instead target the second- most powerful spell. As soon as Neutralise Magic can no longer dismiss a target’s spells, because all the remaining spell’s Magnitudes are too high, its effects immediately end. Neutralise Magic can be fired as a Reaction, but only when another spell is cast within Neutralise Magic’s Range that the character wishes to counter. A success- ful Neutralise Magic disrupts the other spell and nullifies it.   As long as Neutralise Magic’s Magnitude equals or exceeds the target spell’s Magnitude, the target spell is countered.  ▶   Other World Portal (Other World)  Instant This spell creates a portal to a named Other World. The Magnitude of the spell is the number of creatures (SIZ 12-18) who can use the portal simultaneously. The portal exists as long as the spell is in effect. When the spell’s duration is reached, the portal closes instantly. If the spell casting is fumbled, catastrophic events occur. Here are some example events but the creative Gamemaster is encouraged to create more:  A malignant creature from that Other World goes through the portal and attacks the caster, in an attempt to close the portal.  The caster and all within 10m of them are sucked through the portal, which then promptly closes. Worse the caster is so befuddled that he cannot remember this spell for D20+D4 hours.  The Other World, to which the portal is connected, invades the home reality in a 1D10 km diametre from the portal.   The home reality protects itself by throwing up a magical barrier that lets things into the beachhead but not out.  ▶   Palsy  Resist (Resilience)  57 Chapter 8.   Arcane Magic

=== PAGE 60 ===

If the caster is able to overcome his target with this spell, he can turn the victim’s own nervous system against them.   The spell will paralyse the target, provided the spell’s Magnitude is greater than the quarter of target’s current Hit Points.  ▶   Poison Antidote  This spell counteracts an antidote to any poison. For the duration of the spell, it reduces any poison’s potency by its magnitude X 5. This is for the chance to resist the poison initially.   If that resistance test is failed, it still reduces the poison’s effective potency by its magnitude X 5.   If cast on a person who is already affected by a poison, they get another chance to resist the poison.  ▶   Protective Sphere  When completed, the Protective Sphere will create a sphere-shaped area of protection with a radius in metres equal to the spell’s Magnitude. If this spell is cast on the ground (or other immovable place) it cannot be moved. If cast on a vehicle (such as the bed of a wagon) or a person, it will move with the target.   After the sphere has been completed any one or all of the following spells can be added to provide the defensive capacities of the Sphere during the duration of the Sphere: Damage Re- sistance, Spell Resistance, Spirit Resistance. The Sphere on its own provides no protection. The Protective Sphere’s perimeter contains the ben- efits of its combined Resistance spell(s). The Protective Sphere only inhibits spells or attacks entering the circle from the outside – attacks or spells originating within the circle are unaffected. Thus a Protective Sphere against spirits would block out outside spirits but have no ef- fect on those already inside its perimeter.   A Protec- tive Sphere against damage or spells would block out incoming attacks/spells, but have no effect on those at- tacks made within the sphere (including attacks target- ing those outside the sphere).  ▶   Regenerate  Concentration Special, Instant, Touch This spell causes a severed or maimed limb to regrow or reattach. Regenerate cannot return a character from the embrace of death. The Magnitude of the spell must equal or exceed the maximum Hit Points lost as a result of the Major Wound taken.   This spell will cause a limb severed by a Major Wound to regrow or, if the detached limb is still present, for the limb to reattach itself to its stump. Regenerate takes a number of minutes equal to the target’s SIZ to reattach a limb, during which time the caster must maintain concentration on the spell.   The Hit Points lost due to the Major Wound are recovered at the end of this period.  ▶   (Sense) Projection  Concentration Each (Sense) Projection spell is a separate spell. Each spell encompasses one of the five base senses but there are also variants for any unusual sensory mechanism ap- propriate to the game world (such as sonar). This spell allows the caster to project one of his senses anywhere within the spell’s Range.   The spell forms an invisible and intangible sensor, some ten centimetres across, which receives the specified type of sensory input and transmits it to the caster.   The sensor can move a number of metres per Combat Round equal to the spell’s Magnitude at the caster’s direction and allows them to use his Perception skill through the sensor. Spells can be cast through the sensor of some Pro- jecti